park/area news,a walk in the woods, gatlinburg tennessee last updated 10/20/99 headlines fatal bear attack bear incident provides lessons all taxa biodiversity inventory red wolf introduction program ends elk to be released in park 1998 safest in park history peregrine falcons are back walking improves memory seasonal road closings park now part of the lonely planet fatal bear attack - on may 21, two black bears attacked and killed a woman in the great smoky mountains national park. this is the first fatal bear attack that has ever occurred not only inside the park, but also in the entire southeastern portion of the united states. the 50-year-old local woman was fishing with her ex husband. her ex left her for about an hour before looking for her. he found her untouched daypack, then found her with two bears standing over the body. the incident occurred near the little river in the elkmont section of the park. park rangers responded and killed the two bears. the 112-pound female and her 40 pound yearling had both preyed on the body. although complete examinations of the bears and woman are not yet complete, early indications are the bears came upon her while she was laying down, perhaps napping. in recorded history, there have been a total of 43 fatal black bear attacks in north america. in general, the frequency of attacks increase as you go north in latitude. over the last 10 years, there has been an average of one black bear caused fatality a year, compared to two for grizzly bears. with an estimated 500,000 to 700,000 black bears in north america, and over 350 million humans, bear attacks are an extremely rare occurrence. this attack will be studied thoroughly to try to determine what lead these bears to kill. this tragedy should help remind us all that black bears are wild animals. they need to be respected while we travel in their home, but not feared. throughout the united states, man, not bears, is the top predator. especially in the southeast, black bears are only opportunistic carnivores. they will eat meat when they can get it, but they will not usually expend a lot of energy to get it. as an example, in the 30+ years bears have been studied inside the park, there has never been any evidence that a black bear has eaten a trout! if they come across a careless, weak, sick, dead or injured animal, they will eat it, but a vast majority of their diet comes from roots, insects, berries, nuts and other plant matter. bear incident provides lessons - a "bear attack" last summer provides a great lesson on how not to act around bears. a man came across a bear jam on the cades cove loop road caused by a bear cub on the side of the road. the man grabbed his video camera and began filming. he walked up to the bear cub, and the cub ran into the woods. the man followed close behind. the cub ran up to its mother, and two of its siblings. the man continued filming as he approached the family. the sow snorted a warning at the man, but he continued filming. the bear then commenced her final warning sign, a false charge. the man dropped his camera and took off running. the bear quickly caught up to him, and slapped him down with her paw. the man fell on a log with several sharp protrusions, and impaled himself on the log. the sow left the man lying prone, and took her family off into the woods. the park service ruled the bear was within her rights defending her family, and the bear was not removed from the area. the lessons? 1. no matter how cute they look, never approach a bear. 2. stay away from bear cubs, they will be defended. 3. never run from a bear (even though black bears are only opportunistic carnivores, any predator has a deep instinct to chase something that runs). 4. most importantly, black bears are nothing to be feared, they are to be respected. in this example, the bear had the person who threatened her cubs totally helpless lying injured on a log and she walked away. black bears do not hunt people, and usually run away as soon as they are aware of their presence. with a little common sense and respect, coming across a bear in the wild will provide memories to last a lifetime. all taxa biodiversity inventory - a huge project is beginning in the great smoky mountains national park. it is estimated that there are over 100,000 species of life within the boundaries of the park, but only about 10,000 have been cataloged. a new type of organization, discover life in america, is going to attempt to catalogue all species of life in the park boundaries over the next 12 to 15 years. discover life is a partnership of universities, colleges, museums, government agencies, corporate sponsors, and volunteers. one of the organizations goals is to have one web page for each species of life in the park, complete with all known information on the species. volunteers of any age and from all over the world are wanted to participate in the project. some early finding, a tarantula the size of a mite, and seven species of flies new to science. red wolf introduction program ends - the eight-year effort to reintroduce red wolves into the park has ended. the remaining wolves will be captured before winter and moved elsewhere. although the adult wolves released into the park did well, none of the pups lived through a winter. parvo, lack of game, predation from coyotes and other wolves have been offered as reasons for the failure of young wolves to survive in the park. the biggest underlying reason seems to be that red wolves are not suited to life in the mountains. the wolves mostly stayed around the low country of cades cove. elk to be released in park - with a few hurdles left to go, it now seems likely that the park will begin an experimental program of re-introducing elk into the park in jan/feb 2001. the plan is to release 25 animals into the park each year for several years. the animals will be radio collared and monitored closely. the last reported elk in the area was shot and killed in tennessee in 1849. before being hunted to extinction, elk were plentiful throughout the entire appalachian mountain system. 1998 safest in park history - only one person died in the park in 1998, the fewest fatalities on record. the one person died in april while attempting to swim across the little pigeon river. most park fatalities are due to traffic accidents. the decrease in traffic fatalities is welcome, but mysterious. according to park spokesperson nancy gray, "i would like to believe people are being more careful, then again it could just be the luck of the draw." unfortunately, 1999 will not match the '98 figure. already there have been at least 4 fatalities inside the park. in mid april, a small plane went down south of the at in the western section of the park killing the pilot, and in june, a 67 year old man died of natural causes during a lone at hike from clingman's dome to fontanna. july rains helped contribute to two unrelated drowning incidents inside the park. peregrine falcons are back - the endangered peregrine falcon is alive and well inside the park. the park service conducted an effort from 1984-86 to reintroduce the birds to the area. another bird was re-released into the park on 6/1/99 after spending eight months in rehab at the second chance wildlife rehabilitation center in whittier nc. the bird was discovered by park ranger dean mihelich with a compound fracture of its leg. the peregrine falcons are the fastest animals on earth, achieving speeds close to 200 m.p.h. during their power dives. the peregrine falcon was removed from the federal endangered species list this summer, but is still on the tennessee endangered list. there are only two known nesting sites in tennessee, one inside the park, and one in chattanooga. walking improves memory - research published this summer in the journal nature concludes that vigorous walking helps brain function. experiments conducted at the university of illinois showed marked improvement in people's "executive control functions" when walking three times a week. executive control functions, ability to make, reconsider and remember choices, establishing and managing plans and schedules, help older people live independently. activities like weight lifting and other anaerobic exercises did not improve these functions. seasonal road closings - it is advisable to call for road conditions before beginning a trip over the lesser used roads in the park (423) 436-1200. scheduled road closings: balsam mountain road november 1 clingmans dome road december 1 forge creek road january 1 parson branch road november 19 rich mountain road november 19 roaring fork motor nature trail december 1 round bottom road november 1 upper tremont road january 1 park now part of the lonely planet - erik and vesna of a walk in the woods led ian wright and the brittish crew from the lonely planet on an overnight trip to mt. leconte lodge in early august. the lonely planet is a travel show that has aired for the past five years on the discover and travel channels and is viewed by 35 million people worldwide. the segment will be part of the lonely planet's guide to the deep south, and will air in late december or early january. the trip was a great success. some highlights were a meal that ian ate of food totally foraged during our hike up, and a perfect myrtle point sunrise.