onedayhikes.com - hiking guide today is thursday february 28, 2002 hiking guide bear factsa guide to hiking in bear country few people travel to the canadian rockies and fail to be moved by the splendor of the wilderness. a multitude of white-topped crests and peaks look like a petrified sea with huge monoliths rising up like the bows of sinking ships. but many fail to appreciate that this wilderness, by definition, is full of wildlife - including bears. incredibly, one out of every two visitors to banff never leaves the townsite, only encountering cuddly bears in souvenir shops. many others head for the trails and the wilderness without much thought. only the more experienced hikers travel with a slight apprehension gnawing at the back of their minds. for this is the land of the bear and we are merely uninvited guests wandering through their dominion. the heightened trepidation does not extend to paranoia. in all but the most exceptional circumstances bears will avoid human contact. in fact, you are about two hundred times more likely to drown in the bathtub relaxing after your hike than you from a bear attack. but bears are dangerous and unpredictable. they deserve our respect. take the grizzly bear. it can move boulders that weigh a quarter of a ton and reach speeds of 45 mph. these details may seem unimpressive, perhaps, when you are behind the wheel of your one-ton car that effortlessly tops 75 mph on the freeway. but now imagine the olympic final of the mens 100m, with the seven fastest athletes in history in the first lanes and a grizzly bear in lane eight. by the time the world record holder passes the halfway mark the 900lb bear would have crossed the finish line. it has speed as well as immense physical strength. lorne perry knows this. in the summer of 1990 he was hiking alone in kootenay national park when he experienced the nightmare of startling a sow grizzly with her two cubs. "i walked into a clearing - and time stopped," he says in bear tales from the canadian rockies. "she was surprised, instantly enraged, and up on her hind legs. something rose up from the pit of my stomach and i felt my chest constricting with total terror. front legs off the ground, paws stretched, claws out, she snarled and snorted, swinging her left and right... then she was coming. nothing would stop her. i knew she had me. i had nowhere to run." running would not have saved lorne perry. he survived by playing dead and despite bad wounds managed to get help from hikers and made it to hospital. this incident, like so many other documented attacks, reminds us that the best way to avoid an attack is to avoid an encounter altogether. from our research, we believe that there are six golden rules to follow when hiking in bear country. #1 always be prepared and informed. seek information and guidance from visitor centers and guidebooks. your safety is your responsibility. #2 never hike alone. even better, hike with at least five others (there is not one documented case of a bear attacking a group of six or more people). #3 always make your presence known. make noise regularly - shout - to let any bear know that you are in the area. experts suggest that noisemakers, such as bells and whistles, may not be effective as the human voice. our anecdotal evidence supports this: we've heard people shouting from a considerable distance away but only heard bear bells when we saw the wearer, and never from more than 5 yards away. #4 never hike without bear spray. it is not guaranteed to work but, as a last resort, it is better than every other option and probably more effective than a gun (because you have to kill the bear with the first shot - a wounded grizzly is a force of nature you probably will not survive). #5 always stay alert, looking for bear signs (tracks, scat, tree scratching, digging). be very cautious near berry patches in august and if you encounter an animal carcass leave the area immediately. #6 never run or show fear if you do encounter a bear. talk softly. move slowly. do not threaten the bear and avoid eye contact (especially with grizzlies). these are general rules only. every encounter, however rare, is unique and depends on many factors, including the species and the temperament of the individual bear. more details can be found in such books as hiking in bear country by brian mcclung. so how do you tell the difference between a grizzly and a black bear? the biggest differentiator is that the grizzly has a large lump on its back between its shoulders. the grizzly also has rounded ears while a black bear has taller, straighter ears. another clue is the facial profile - a grizzly has a dished-in profile and a dog-like snout. by contrast, a black bear has a straighter facial profile and more of a pig-like snout (see diagram). finally, a grizzly has longer and lighter colored front claws. remember, the size and color of the bear are not reliable indicators of species. adult grizzlies are 40% bigger than blacks but, of course, you can meet young, smaller grizzlies and large, adult blacks. as for color, a grizzly varies from pure black to blonde, frequently with white-tipped fur that gives a grizzled appearance. a black bear varies from pure black to brown, cinnamon and blonde. so it's probably the advice given by an old mountain man that will stick in your mind: "climb a tree. the black bear will climb after you. old grizzly, he don't climb; so he'll just shake you out of the tree like a plum, if he don't tear it out by the roots." somehow, whenever you think of this in bear country you seem to holler a bit louder and keep your senses sharper, trying to sense the presence of the bear. for the bear is the spirit of the wilderness. without them roaming free, mountain areas are simply reduced to tame environments, natural playgrounds that we wander through less respectfully. epilogue in july 2001, our research team visited all the national parks in the canadian rockies, as well as glacier national park in montana. five bear sightings were made in total, three from the roadside, and two encounters on the trail. encounter #1. two young black bears, hell roaring canyon (crypt lake), waterton. the bears came out of the forest on the opposite bank and plunged into the river some 50ft away and about 20ft below the vantage point. noise was made and the frightened bears ran away back into the forest at speed. encounter #2. adult black bear, lineham ridge, waterton. the adult was first spotted 100ft away in a clearing. bear spray was to hand as noise was made, the bear did not react at all. in its own time it disappeared into the forest. it was next encountered eating berries by the trail, distance 20ft. the bear was very placid and totally unconcerned by human presence, eventually moving away. final note author graham pole mentions in his book classic hikes of the rockies that in 11 years of backcountry travel in the rockies he hiked 11,000 km and met eight grizzlies and six black bears on the trail. that works out, on average, at only one bear encounter for every 785 km hiked. that puts a perspective on chances of bear encounters, let alone the odds of an attack. however, your best protection is to respect the wilderness and be prepared. further reading bears and people - a guide to safety and conservation on the trail. this excellent leaflet is avaiable from the canada park service and is available at visitor centers in canadian national parks. useful links park canada the mark of the grizzly sign up for our newsletter sample | privacy policy our mission | e-mail us | north america | europe | asia pacific | latin america | links | hikes | books | features | hiking guides | news | photo studio source code and contents © 2002 neocom consulting limited. all rights reserved.reproduction of any material in any form without prior written consent strictly prohibited.