grizzly bear encounters and attacks grizzly bear encounters return to: the american grizzly bear e-mail: agrizzly@att.net all images below are thumbnails: click on image if you want a larger view grizzly bear encounters and attacks are extremely rare. a person visiting yellowstone or glacier national park is much more likely to be injured in an automobile accident or a fall than by a grizzly bear.  the overwhelming odds against being injured by a grizzly bear are widely reported--i will not recite them here.   having said that--grizzlies are powerful animals with the ability to inflict severe wounds with little effort.  precautions should be taken to try to avoid an encounter when entering grizzly country, but there are no hard and fast rules to ensure an encounter will not occur.  how does one avoid an encounter?   if an encounter occurs, what action should one take?  books have been written on the subject and the national park service and others provide information and suggestions through brochures and information on their websites.  i will discuss my ideas, which have been developed to a great extent from visiting websites with information on bears and by reading brochures and books on the subject (such as bear encounters, their causes and avoidance by stephen herrero). i have also spent a lot of time hiking and camping in grizzly country and thinking about bears. pepper spray a few years ago it was rather rare to see anyone carrying pepper spray in glacier national park or yellowstone while hiking or backpacking. today, i do carry pepper spray.  many other people also carry it.  pepper spray manufactured specifically for use against bears is the only type of spray i would consider carrying in bear country--large can, proper concentration of the active ingredients (capsaicin and related capsaicinoids ingredient).  i would not consider carrying a smaller can or a product made for self defense against dogs or humans. the use of pepper spray as a defense against a grizzly bear attack may prevent me from being seriously injured and may prevent a grizzly bear from being destroyed.  after much consideration, i have decided to carry it and be prepared to use it.  i would also use it if i were attacked by a mountain lion, and i would use it to repel a predatory attack by a grizzly bear or a black bear.  i have hiked a lot of miles in grizzly country without pepper spray.  i don't plan to go into the woods thinking:  if i run into a grizzly bear, i don't have to worry because i carry pepper spray. there are documented cases of pepper spray repelling charging grizzly bears without injury to the human.  there are also cases where the user of pepper spray was  injured.  without knowing the specifics of an encounter where pepper spray was used, it is impossible to determine why injury may have occurred.  was the proper product used--large can, made for defense against bears?  had the effective date for use of the product passed?  was the bear hit with the spray?  was the bear sprayed directly in the face?  at what distance?  more and more data are becoming available from incidents involving the use of pepper spray to repel charges by bears.  the reports i have read, including results recently published by stephen herrero, are generally positive.  tests are being conducted under varying conditions--wind conditions, rain, size of the can, delivery pattern of the spray, distance to target, loss of potency of the pepper spray (shelf life), and other variables may determine the effectiveness on a charging grizzly bear. here are links with more information about bear pepper spray--two web sites of manufacturers of pepper spray and the yellowstone ecosystem subcommittee of the interagency grizzly bear committee position paper on the subject: igbc bear pepper spray position paper counter assault udap some pepper sprays may be marketed as "bear spray" or "bear repellent" that are not made specifically for use against an attacking grizzly bear.  the differences may be in the size of the can, the concentration of the effective ingredient, and the delivery system.   the concentration of capsaicin must be strong enough to have the desired effect on the bear.    the delivery system must be capable of delivering the spray with sufficient force and suspension; in other words not fall at my feet when it comes out of the can. i carry the spray where i can get to it immediately--in a holster on my hip. carrying it in a chest holster is also an option.  it won't do any good if it's in my pack.   there is (or should be) a date on the can, probably on the bottom which may be a date the spray was manufactured. i believe counter assault and udap recommend replacing the spray after three years. no guarantees there are no guarantees for safety when i enter grizzly country.  i must accept the risk, realizing that i am entering the grizzly bear's home.  grizzly habitat is shrinking.  they have only a few "sanctuaries" left in the lower 48 states where they are somewhat protected--grizzly bear recovery zones.  each year millions of people invade glacier national park, yellowstone, and other parts of grizzly country.  the fact that very few incidents occur between grizzlies and humans is a testament to the grizzly's ability to cope with humans.   the following discussion represents some of my ideas on how i try to avoid encounters and how to deal with encounters and attacks should they occur.  considering the number of visitors to grizzly country, few ever see a grizzly bear, much less get attacked by one. in addition to concerns for personal safety, encounters between grizzly bears and humans have serious implications for the grizzly.  grizzly bears that have conflicts with humans and are declared a nuisance may be removed from the population.  the interagency grizzly bear guidelines address management actions to be taken when grizzly bears have "conflicts with humans."  removal of any grizzly bear from an already threatened population, reduces chances for recovery to a healthy status and ultimately removal from the endangered species list.  the ability to some day make realistic projections for long-term survival of the species depends on protecting grizzlies and protecting the habitat they need to survive.  be mindful of the consequences for humans and grizzlies when encounters occur. encounters and attacks i am not an expert on grizzly bear encounters and attacks.  i do not offer any of this information as advice on how to avoid encounters and attacks or how to deal with encounters and attacks.   it is simply information on how i think about grizzly bear encounters and attacks. it has been developed by reading, watching films, and and spending a lot of time hiking and camping in bear country. all grizzly bears don't run away when they encounter humans.  each situation is different.  in glacier i encountered a grizzly bear on a trail at close range--thirty feet.  the grizzly was sitting, facing away from me  the bear got up, ran into the woods away from me, and let out a tremendous roar.    the outcome may have been different if the grizzly had been facing me. in 1997 in a backcountry campsite in glacier, a  bear came into camp while i was packing to leave after cooking a breakfast of instant oatmeal and instant coffee a little earlier.  my wife came down the trail and started telling me something about a bear.  i turned to find a  bear staring at me from a distance of about 30 or 40 feet.  the bear was standing in some grass at the edge of the lake. i was looking at him/her head on.  at first sight, my heart skipped a beat, mainly because of the color, which was brown.  but that bear was a cinnamon black bear, the first of that color i had ever seen. i recognized that it was a black bear and not a grizzly mainly by the shape of the face and big ears.  when i recognized that it was a black bear, i began hollering, waving my arms, and threw a rock behind as the bear began to slowly move away--i would not have taken any of these actions if it had been a grizzly. i don't know if the bear was attracted by the cooking odors i had recently created.  the bear was likely habituated to this campsite--i later learned from a ranger hikers had picked up fish guts and a chunk of cheese near the edge of the lake the day before.  due to no fault of its own, that beautiful black bear may no longer be a resident of glacier national park or any other place.   it is likely that bear has been destroyed. bear destroyed in glacier national park backcountry campsite july 14, 1998 my wife and i have just returned from a week of backpacking in glacier national park, montana.  a young black bear was shot and killed on july 3, 1998, in one of the backcountry campsites after getting human food that was left unattended for a few minutes.  the bear also got other food that was hung but not out of reach. park rangers spent three nights trying to haze the bear away from the campground by firing bean bags at him and using other means.  the final straw came when he got into cookware that was left on the ground while campers took a day hike.  we witnessed other inexcusable careless food-handling practices that may lead to the destruction of other black bears and/or grizzly bears--other cookware and food left unattended or improperly stored (including by a commercial guide service), food and garbage disposed in campsites and food preparation areas, feeding wildlife. food and other items with odors must be properly stored and hung out of reach of bears at all times when not in use, including cookware that had been washed.  trash and food waste must be packed out.  after receiving a $50 fine for leaving their cookware unattended we witnessed one of these same campers toss onion peels into the weeds at a food preparation area at another campsite.  this individual is an educated man, a yale man, working for the federal reserve board in washington d.c.  ignorance is one thing, stupidity is another.  i later talked to the park ranger who killed the young black bear--he said it was one of the hardest things he had ever had to do.  it is true that "a fed bear is a dead bear." grizzly bears and black bears that become habituated to humans and their food are very likely to be destroyed.  habituation occurs due to carelessness by visitors to bear country and residents living in bear country.  there are also cases of people intentionally feeding bears and other wildlife and reports of a wildlife photographer intentionally baiting bears on his property to obtain close-up photographs of grizzly bears--watch for them in your favorite wildlife or outdoor magazine. here are a few of my ideas on encounters with grizzly bears and a little about black bears and some "rules" i follow to try to avoid encounters and some rules i would try to follow should an encounter or attack occur.  if i am hiking or camping with others, it is important to discuss "my rules" with them. preparation rules learn the distinguishing characteristics of grizzly bears and black bears.  although black bears should be considered dangerous and afforded due respect, grizzly bears are a different animal.  it is important to know the difference. the two bears below are a black bear (reddish brown or cinnamon) and a grizzly, respectively.   color is not a reliable identifying characteristic for either species.  of the first 10 black bears i saw in 1998, only 2 were "black." this young blond black bear illustrates that color is not a good indicator of species color and apparent shoulder hump of this mother (below) might lead one to think these black bears are grizzlies--note the large ear.  when viewed from a different angle, the straight-line (not dished) facial profile and lack of true shoulder hump indicated they are black bears. there is no guarantee for my safety, and i must be willing to risk an encounter. be mentally prepared for a grizzly bear encounter and attack. read about grizzly bear encounters and attacks. think about grizzly bear encounters and attacks. talk about grizzly bear encounters and attacks. remember--grizzly bear encounters and attacks are extremely rare. hiking rules check for local information on recent grizzly sightings and activity. take note of signs posted at the trailhead--the one above is posted in glacier national park and reads: "you are entering a wilderness area and must accept certain inherent dangers, including snow, steep terrain, water and wildlife. there is no guarantee of your safety bears have injured and killed visitors and may attack without warning and for no apparent reason.  to enhance your safety and protect park resources, follow the recommendations posted below." although in places like glacier and yellowstone visitors are asked to report all bear sightings, they don't.  information on sightings that are reported in one location of the park may not be available in another location.  just because i am told there have been no recent sightings in an area where i plan to hike does not mean there are no grizzly bears there. be alert to the surroundings--watch, listen, smell, feel the wind. am i hiking into the wind or with the wind?  grizzly bears don't have particularly great hearing or vision, but they can "smell me from a mile away" and more if wind conditions are right.  look for fresh signs on the trail--scat (grizzly droppings are large), digs (grizzlies can dig up enough earth to make it look like a backhoe was at work, but their work can also be more subtle when digging tasty and nutritious roots of plants), rubs (they love to scratch against trees and will leave hair as a sign that they were present), tracks (typically, grizzly tracks are larger than a black bear, with a much more evident claw impression).  watch and smell for carcasses.  never approach a carcass.  if i see a carcass, or indications of a buried carcass, i must use extreme caution.  grizzly bears may stay in the vicinity of a carcass and feed on it for several days.  i would  not go near it and would use extreme caution in moving out of the area. dry scat scat make noise on the trail to avoid surprises--although i don't like the practice of making a lot of noise while hiking, i do make noise--particularly near bends in the trail and other places where visibility is reduced.  remember the effects from wind and streams on diminishing noise levels. carry food and other scented items in double-bagged ziplock bags. if a grizzly bear is sighted while hiking, do not approach. approaching a grizzly bear to try to get a close-up photograph, or for any other reason, is asking for serious trouble. never hike alone is not a rule i always follow, but it is advised by glacier national park, yellowstone, and many others.  there are data that suggest hiking in a group (a group which stays together) diminishes the chances of being attacked. backcountry camping rules a rule for camping, or any other activity, anywhere in grizzly country is: never allow a grizzly bear to obtain human food.  a grizzly bear that becomes conditioned to sources of human food becomes very dangerous, may cause injury in obtaining the food and will likely be killed as a result -- either in "self defense" or by authorities charged with grizzly bear management.  "a fed bear is a dead bear." generally, backpackers are required to obtain a permit and camp at designated backcountry campsites in national parks.  although rangers and other national park service employees patrol and check these sites, it is impossible to check each site every day.  we all must do our part to keep a clean camp to prevent attracting bears. if improper food handling and storage practices are observed, don't hesitate  to inform the offending party and notify park officials.  in national forests and wilderness areas backcountry camping is less regulated and you can choose a good site away from bear trails and obvious areas used by bears.  never set up camp anywhere near a carcass.  at least one backcountry campsite on my backpacking route in yellowstone was closed last spring because there was a carcass nearby.  if the park service is aware of the situation, they will close the site.  even if i had been assigned that site, i would not have stayed there--the smell is reason enough.  the backcountry permit system in national parks is very restrictive as to where one may camp and for how long, but backpackers are not expected to place themselves in danger because of circumstances beyond their control.  if conditions appear unsafe, move on to another site or go back. keep a clean camp--odors attract bears and other wildlife. don't leave food and other attractants unattended.  keep them hung when not in use. cook away from sleeping area and 100 yards downwind if possible.  cook foods that don't give off too many inviting odors. don't burn or bury leftover food and garbage--place it in zip lock bags and pack it out. never cook inside a tent.  keep tent free of odors that attract bears, odors from food (including pet food) or other items with odors.  the list is very long and includes:  soap, toothpaste, lip balm, insect repellent, water containers, cooking gear, sweaty clothes, clothes worn while cooking, tobacco, and many more). these items must be hung when not in use, at least 10 feet above the ground (preferably higher) and 4 feet away from tree trunk or pole and well away from sleeping area.  i hang almost everything, including my backpack.  canoeing into a backcountry area is a nice way to travel (if one is not partial to carrying an overloaded backpack for several miles), but don't bring more than can be hoisted over a tree limb or hung on a bear pole, like huge coolers full of beer and sausage. wash hands and face before going to bed to try to remove cooking odors. use a non-scented soap. never sleep in clothes i have cooked in until they have been washed (cooked in today, yesterday, or last week). encounter rules it is impossible to make a list of rules that will work in all encounter situations, but i have a few basic ones.  an encounter may occur unexpectedly, or an encounter may occur because a human approaches a bear to get a better view or a photograph.  my rule is never approach a grizzly bear for any reason.  one must keep in mind that each grizzly bear is an individual.  some grizzlies may turn and run when encountered at close range--others may charge immediately. here are my rules for dealing with an encounter (up to the point of physical contact--attack).  keep in mind--distances at which encounters may occur and times of reaction by the bear will vary.  things may happen very quickly.  be prepared. if confronted with a grizzly bear (or black bear),  do not run--including for the nearest tree. stay calm--it may be difficult, but don't panic. get the pepper spray hanging from my belt and be ready to use it. don't holler. don't wave arms. stand still--hold my ground. try not to pose a threat to the grizzly--some "advise" don't look the bear in the eyes. talk softly--this may help the grizzly identify what you are and may tell him/her that you are not a threat. if the grizzly charges, things have changed.  now is when that preparation time and confidence will pay off.  it may not prevent an injury, but i should be ready to deal with what comes next.  if i am with others, they also must be prepared.  that's why it is important to discuss this possibility before setting out--"my rules."  if i am hiking with my wife and daughters, i may be able to control other situations (not that they couldn't).  once a charge is made, we all must be ready. the grizzly may have decided on a plan for dealing with me and is now putting it into action.  however, my response may alter that plan.  here are the possibilities i think about:  if a grizzly charges me after first assessing the situation and i run, i would expect to be attacked.  if a grizzly charges and i hold my ground, i believe the outcome is uncertain.  there may be one or more charges without contact, possibly several of them and possibly to within a few feet, and then the grizzly may decide to go away.  there may be one or more charges without contact, and then an attack may ensue.  there may be one charge and an immediate attack. other than holding my ground during a charge, what else might i do?  there is one more option--fire the pepper spray at the charging grizzly.  counter assault advertises for their 12 ounce canister:  sprays 18-35 feet--contains 10 -12 blasts--empties in 6-8 second. i would fire the first blast at a distance within the effective range of the spray--maybe 25 feet.  if the grizzly did not break off the charge i would continue firing, aiming directly for the face.  keep in mind that a grizzly bear might cover a distance of fifty yards in about three seconds.  at that rate, a grizzly would cover 30 feet in less than one second--like humans, some grizzly bears run the 50 yard dash faster than others.  also keep in mind, all charges do not result in attack, physical contact.  many charges are broken off at the last instant. tree climbing is not an option i would consider in most situations regarding climbing trees--it has been widely reported that grizzlies other than cubs can't or don't climb trees.  while it is true that black bears are more adapted to climbing, grizzlies may employ a combination of climbing, pulling, and reaching to advance up a tree to reach an object--including a human.  grizzly bears are highly intelligent and adaptive.  their abilities should not be under-estimated.  a grizzly bear can cover 50 yards in about 3 seconds.  before taking off for a tree, i would have to consider the distance between the grizzly and myself and the distance to the nearest climbable tree that i could climb to a safe height.  if i were to take off running for a tree, the grizzly may charge and initiate an attack.  once i start climbing how high do i need to go?  i once read that a person should climb at least 33 feet because a grizzly bear has been known to climb to slightly less than 33 feet during an attack.  of course, how high depends on the particular grizzly i may be climbing against.  do i drop my pack to make climbing easier?  if i do and don't make it, i won't have the pack for protection during an attack.  there may be instances when climbing a tree is an appropriate response--such as sighting a bear at a distance that would allow time to find a suitable tree and climb to a safe height. that is a judgement call i would have to make depending on the circumstances. depending on what the grizzly might be doing, i might have to sit in the tree for quite a while.  in a case like that backtracking, detouring, or staying on the ground and waiting for the grizzly to move out of the area might also be options. remember, grizzly bear behavior and reaction to an encounter are not totally predictable, but the outcome will likely be highly dependent on the reaction and behavior of the person or persons involved.  try to remain calm--most encounters end without injury.  grizzlies often  charge without initiating contact, possibly veering off at the last split-second before contact. any conflict between a grizzly bear and humans, even if no injury is associated, may result in the grizzly being declared a nuisance and being "removed" from the population.  removed typically means destroyed, killed.  the interagency grizzly bear guidelines are used by managers to determine the control action to be taken after a conflict with humans occurs.  for more information on the guidelines go to interagency grizzly bear guidelines. attack rules (note: theses rules do not apply to predatory attacks.)  there may be other situations where following these "rules" may not be a good idea--such as encountering a grizzly defending a carcass or other food source. i define attack as physical contact with a grizzly bear. curl into a ball on my side or lie flat on my stomach, with hands clasped behind by head to protect my neck (pack will help protect my back).  lying flat on stomach might prevent being rolled over by the grizzly. if curled into a ball, pull my knees toward my chin to help protect vital organs. try to remain calm and quiet until the attack ends.  try not to scream.  do not resist or fight back. try to make sure the bear has left the area before getting up, but also try to see what direction was taken (peek). get up slowly, checking to see if the bear can be seen or heard. if the bear returns, return to the ground and stay motionless. assess my injuries and the injuries of others and treat as best as possible (first aid kit considerations). get out of the area or get help. playing dead this strategy for dealing with an attack is known as playing dead. injuries are almost certain to occur during any grizzly bear attack; the idea is to be subjected to lesser injuries than are likely to occur by trying to run or by trying to fight back.  i have read and heard of attacks in which the person being attacked moved too quickly after the initial attack and was attacked a second time with much greater injuries being administered by the grizzly.  a grizzly bear that attacks a human likely does so because the human is perceived as a threat.  if the grizzly attacks and then stops the attack, the victim is no longer perceived to be a threat. movement is again perceived as a threatening action.  give the bear time to move away before moving or getting up.  predatory attacks are different and require a totally different strategy--i would not play dead if subjected to a predatory attack (see below). again, i do not offer any of this information as advice on how to avoid encounters and attacks or how to deal with encounters and attacks.  for a detailed discussion, with many case studies and data, read stephen herrero's book, bear attacks, their causes and avoidance.   another book on the subject, backcountry bear basics, was published in 1997 by the mountaineers.  many other books on the subject are available.  read more than one book.  reading on the subject helps me feel more confident that i can handle an encounter with a grizzly should one occur.  i don't rely solely on what i read in a book.  i think about grizzly bear encounters a lot.  others may offer "advice" on how to deal with grizzly bear encounters and attacks.   i am responsible for my own safety. if i am injured by a grizzly bear, it is my fault--not the grizzly bear's fault and not the fault of the author of some book i read on how to avoid an encounter.  there are no guarantees.  i am not terrified of flying in airplanes, but i am occasionally a little uncomfortable--i have no control of the airplane.  hiking and camping in grizzly country are not like that--i have a lot of control.  grizzly bear encounters and attacks are extremely rare, but they do happen.  i accept the risk. predatory attack rules (applies to grizzly bears, black bears, and mountain lions) i define predatory attack as:  an attack by a grizzly bear or black bear where the bear has intentions of making a meal of me.  if a bear had been stalking me and then attacked, i would consider that a predatory attack.  if a bear attacked me in my tent, i would consider that a predatory attack.  some advise that any attack by a black bear should be considered a predatory attack.  i don't accept that assumption.  i believe there may be cases where a black bear may attack in a defensive mode, such as a surprise encounter on a trail at close range (particularly if a sow with cubs are involved. fight with anything i have. use pepper spray--after much deliberation, i purchased pepper spray for this and other possible situations.  a recent newspaper article reported that some people had used pepper spray as a "bear repellent," applying it to the skin, like mosquito repellent.  the can i have warns against contact with skin.  others are known to have sprayed it around the perimeter of their tent to set up an invisible barrier, ensuring a safe night's sleep.  guess what?  the use of pepper spray in these ways may actually attract bears, a food-like odor.   i believe in the application of a little common sense in the use of any such powerful irritant. absent that, always read the directions.  for more detail about the use and effectiveness of pepper spray, read what dave moody, chief bear biologist for the wyoming game and fish department, said about using pepper spray. if someone else is the victim i must try to help by distracting the bear or attacking the bear with any available weapon. remember, habitat is the key to grizzly bear recovery. protect grizzly bear habitat thanks for visiting links to pages on this site home page--the american grizzly bear grizzly bears and garbage recent grizzly bear news northern continental divide grizzly bear ecosystem/glacier national park yellowstone grizzly bear ecosystem selkirk/cabinet-yaak grizzly bear ecosystems north cascade grizzly bear recovery area bitterroot grizzly bear ecosystem grizzly country grizzly bear references grizzly bear encounters photo galleries -- glacier, yellowstone, grizzly bear, canadian rockies, alaska/yukon, and north cascades links to grizzly bear & related sites e-mail: agrizzly@att.net