avoiding bear maulings, grizzly attack defense pepper spray information, education and products as seen on tv - discovery channel's "how to survive!" | home page | bear products | human products | law enforcement | holsters & accessories | | how to use | bear safety tips | street safety | f.a.q.s | your story | dealer inquiries | testimonials | links | | order policies | order online | view cart | track order | alaska and canada orders | bear safety tips be prepared before you explore the great outdoors! traveling in bear country can be quite exhilarating. although most bear attacks can  be avoided, there is always a chance of encountering a bear. the following is a compilation of the latest information collected from various wildlife specialists, bear encounters,  and articles featuring bear encounters. although nothing is 100% guaranteed effective, here are some tips that might prove to be useful in an encounter. be alert in bear country • always have udap bear deterrent pepper spray in its holster ready for immediate use. don’t bury it in your pack. • be alert where recent bear activity has been documented by park officials, fish and game, forest service, and other public service people. some common areas where bears like to frequent are: avalanche chutes, stream beds, dense edge cover and, in late summer, berry patches. • use extreme caution when travelling on trails at night or at either end of day. • be careful with food smells - never cook close to camp. store all foods in plastic away from camp at night and when camp is unattended. we suggest at least 100 yards from camp and at least 14 feet up a tree hung 4 feet away from the trunk. • watch for fresh bear sign (scat or bear tracks) on the trail or near possible camp sites. • if possible, make plenty of noise on the trail, especially on blind curves, in dense vegetation or areas with limited vision. • be conscious of the wind - bears have an excellent sense of smell. if the wind is at your back, chances are a bear will smell you and leave the area well before you reach it. if the wind is blowing in your face, your chances of an encounter greatly increase. also, in high wind situations or along creeks and streams, a bear might not hear you coming or you might not hear it. • dead animal carcass - if you come upon a dead animal carcass, immediately leave the area. bears will often feed on a carcass for days and also stay in the area to protect their food. • bear cubs - if you see a bear cub, chances are the sow is not far away. female bears will fiercely defend their young, so it is best you leave the area and find an alternative route. • keep dogs under control - dogs can lead an angry bear back to you. • we advise not to travel alone in bear country. invite a friend. it is always safer to travel in groups if possible. avoid prime bear habitat avoid areas that bears like and you can reduce your chances of an encounter. if you can’t avoid these areas, be extra cautious and alert when travelling through them. bears like to travel on saddles, ridges, game trails and along water. they’ll eat dead animal carcasses wherever they can find them. they feed on green grasses and also vegetation that grows in wet areas. they often rest in cool, dark, thick forests. grizzly bears are typically, but not exclusively active during the dawn, dusk, and nighttime hours. in spring and early summer, bears are often found in lower elevations along rivers and streams. they love to catch fish when the spawning runs are going. they will also search for winter killed animals in these areas. in the summer, bears usually spend time at higher elevations, often in park like areas. they’ll eat wild berries when they are ripe. if you like to go out wild berry picking, be extra careful, make lots of noise and keep children near you at all times. in the fall, bears are often found in whitebark pine stands eating pine nuts. sometimes a bear will dig around a tree to try to locate a squirrels cache of nuts. bears also dig for roots in mid-elevation meadows, especially in years when there are fewer pine nuts. be aware of recent grizzly bear activity always check with park officials, rangers, or other authorities regarding the area you intend to travel for possible bear activity. always make sure others know where you are going to be in the back country. learn to identify the signs of bear activity and avoid using these areas. typical signs of grizzly bear use include: fresh tracks(a grizzlies claw marks extend farther away from pads than black bears), scat greater than 2 inches in diameter (most likely a grizzly's), areas where the ground may be tore up from bears scavenging, and partially consumed or buried animal carcasses. bear behavior bears seem to experience moods much like we do; they can be shy, curious, pushy, or aggressive, and can possess other attributes that we can identify as humanlike. each time you get close to a bear, you encounter a specific individual that may behave differently from any other individual you have ever met before or will ever meet again. grizzly attack victims are often not aware of why they were attacked. many attacks are caused by close encounters, where the bear has been surprised and feels threatened by human presence. a female with cubs will be especially aggressive and will defend her cubs from any possible threat. many attacks can be avoided if the bear sees a way out of the situation. bears are basically solitary animals. each has its zone of danger, or personal space, which varies from animal to animal. if something or someone penetrates this zone, a response in the form of a bluff charge, bodily contact, or outright attack may result. often times grizzly bears will essentially ignore people until a person enters enters into a bear's "personal space". even groups as large as 100 people have been ignored by grizzly bears until one of the group gets too close. most bears are timid enough to flee a possible encounter if they sense the presence of something or someone soon enough to leave the area undetected. on the other hand, when a bear is surprised, the bear may see you as a threat, forcing an immediate response. a person who runs when frightened by a bear may trigger a chase response. one bear will even chase another if it runs. bears that stand their ground when confronted by other bears usually aren’t attacked, and bears that behave submissively have a lower incidence of being attacked as well. a grizzly bear rarely wants to kill a human. considering the damage a grizzly is capable of inflicting on a human, wounds resulting from bear attacks are often nothing more than superficial bites, scrapes, and lacerations. the evidence is very clear that grizzlies do no t try to kill a human as a result of a close encounter, they simply try to remove a perceived threat. the injuries that occur are more a function of what the human does to resist, rather than what the bear is capable of doing. of course, a grizzly entering a tent represents a predatory event which is behaviorally very different than a close encounter situation. young grizzlies can pose another danger. often these bears have just left their mother and rank low on the hierarchical scale. larger, more dominant bears often push these juveniles into marginal habitat. to survive, young bears do alot of exploring. if these bears start using campgrounds as foraging areas, they may quickly become dangerous to people camping in them. in extremely rare instances, young grizzlies will even key onto people as potential prey. black bears seem to rely more on sheer bluffing than on charging and mauling. those rare instances in which a black bear presses an attack can probably be grouped into two categories: first, a female protecting her cubs, particularly if she is also habituated and food-conditioned; or second, a bear that has no experience with humans and may regard them as possible prey. body language of bears a bear that stands on its hind feet is usually just trying to get a better look and smell by sniffing the air. this is not an aggressive posture in of itself. it simply means that the bear is unsure of what is in front of him, but still could drop on all fours and charge. a bear that swings its head from side to side, or turns sideways from you, is expressing a reluctance to charge and is looking for a way out of the situation. if a bear looks you in the eyes directly and has its ears back, it’s warning that you are too close and feels threatened. a bear may also make barking, woofing or moaning sounds to indicate this. if a bear "pops" its jaws, it is very agitated and most often will charge. charges are often a test to resolve a situation and are often "bluff charges" where the bear stops short of you, veers off and runs right past you. a bear might bluff charge many times before leaving. a bear may also bluff charge a few times and then come at you at a different angle. a bear that does charge, and knocks you down, is attempting to remove a threat. the bear will use as much force as it believes is necessary to remove that threat. a bear can instantly reach speeds of 30 to 35 miles per hour in a matter of a split second. never try to outrun a bear, it will only make matters worse. bear encounters on the trail • stop, stay calm and quiet, and make no sudden moves. • break eye contact - do not stare in the bear’s eyes, as this is a sign of aggression. • stand your ground - do not turn your back on the bear - sometimes a bear will bluff charge several times. have your udap bear deterrent pepper spray ready, but do not spray unless you are sure the bear is close enough to spray in the face. • look for signs of agitation and aggression - when a bear is standing on its hind legs, it is usually just trying to get a better look and smell of you. when a bear is upset it may have it’s ears back- it may lower it’s head and swing it from side to side- it may paw at the ground- it may make huffing or woofing noises- it may snap it’s teeth- or not show any signs at all, and just drop and charge with no warning. • back away slowly, speaking in a calming, monotone voice - you want to show the bear that you are being submissive and want to get out of "it’s" territory. do not turn your back and always have your pepper power ready. • if the bear comes at you - spray the udap bear deterrent pepper spray aiming for the bear’s face or spray a fog out that the bear has to run through to get to you. being close to a sow with cubs is always a dangerous situation. • keep a cool head - try to stay calm, do not yell or scream. • some bears, even grizzlies, will climb trees after you. also a grizzly can reach 10 feet up a tree while standing on the ground. • right before a grizzly bear makes contact in a surprise attack at close range (and you don’t have pepper spray), roll into a ball or lie face down, try to protect your neck an face, and pray. don't stick your arm out, kick, scream, or fight. try to protect the vulnerable parts of your body while remaining as still as possible, this will actively be helping the bear remove the perceived threat. surprising a territorial male bear or a sow with cubs will almost always be a threatening situation. • some bears, mostly young bears unfamiliar with the dangers of human contact, have been known to actually stalk humans. if you believe this is the situation you are in, and have not just surprised the bear, it is recommended that you defend yourself aggressively. • if the bear mauls you continuously, despite yourself being passive, you may have to fight back. try using any available weapon - a knife, rock, fist - and concentrate on hitting the bear’s head, eyes and nostrils. bear encounters in camp the situation of a bear that enters your camp is to be handled differently than a bear surprised on the trail. they might not have any fear of humans and have probably become used to eating human food and garbage. these bears are dangerous, and are no longer fearful of being in close proximity to humans. make sure that you store your food properly. a bear that finds no food in camp is more likely to become disinterested and move on to better pickings. try to remain calm, avoid making direct eye contact and speak softly to the bear. if the bear is within 10 to 15 feet, spray the bear with your udap bear deterrent pepper spray. if it is safe to do so, try slowly backing out of the area while looking for suitable trees to climb. make sure you have enough time to climb a tree before attempting it. make sure you can be up the tree at least 14 feet before the bear reaches you. climb as high as you can and stay there until the bear is gone. be aware that some grizzlies can climb trees and all black bears can. if you are attacked by a bear in camp, it may be a predatory attack or could also just be a bear seeing your camp as it's food source. the bear may have made a conscious choice to attack you, or may see you as a threat to it's food supply. playing dead may not work depending on the situation. spray the bear with your udap bear deterrent pepper spray. fight the attack by punching, slapping or using any object available as a weapon. try to evade the bear by climbing up a tree or onto a boulder. sleep in tents large enough to stack gear between you and the tent wall. if a bear gets within 10 to 15 feet of your tent, or attempts to enter it, spray the bear with your udap bear deterrent pepper spray and fight back. report the incident as soon as possible, even if the bear simply walks through the camp. we do not recommend that you remain in that particular campsite another night. if a bear comes into your camp at night get your udap bear deterrent spray ready, and then, look out of the tent and check out the bear with your flash light. first, make sure it’s a bear, not one of your hiking partners or other harmless animal wandering in the night. if you can identify it as a black bear, the situation is usually not as serious as a grizzly coming into camp. spray the bear if it is within 10 to 15 feet with your udap bear deterrent pepper spray. this will not permanently harm the bear but will let it know that it is an unwelcome guest and it will probably not return. if you have time to get to your escape tree, do it, but don’t leave the tent if you aren’t sure you have time. if the bear (black or grizzly) is hanging around the cooking area because of the food smell, make lots of noise and try to scare the bear away. if a bear comes into your tent this is the worst possible situation. it very rarely happens, but there are a few documented cases. at night attack usually comes from a predatory bear. if you act like prey, you become prey. once more, don’t panic, run, or scream, but don’t remain calm. instead, fight back with everything you have. don’t lie still in your sleeping bag. don’t play dead. use the udap bear deterrent pepper spray. make loud metallic noise. use an air horn. shine lights in the bears eyes. temporarily blind the bear with the flash of your camera. use any deterrent you brought with you. unload on the bear with everything you have. anything goes. use whatever physical resistance you can. what causes a bear to attack? bears attack other bears, other animals, and people because they have genetically programmed types of aggressive behaviors that pertain to population regulation, survival defense, and predatory aggression. this doesn't mean that there aren't other factors involved in some attacks, or that people don't contribute to some attacks. though we have established the fact that bears are unpredictable, there are four situations that are most likely to cause a bear to attack. by knowing what they are we can work to avoid getting into these types of situations. 1. when a person encounters a protective sow with cubs. an average of 78% of all attacks are related to these encounters. 2. when a bear is surprised, or startled. 3. when a human gets too close to a bear's food supply. 4. predatory bear (when the bear intends to eat you). regardless of the situation, surprise is one of the leading causes of bear attacks. a surly solitary bear, who is startled by a hiker on a trail, may run away or aggressively confront the hiker. most injury encounters with bears occur when the person gets within 55 yards before the bear is aware of his presence. mark's experience changed his life. since then, he has dedicated himself to improving a product designed to safeguard people against maulings, and to help them better coexist with wildlife. in a short time, his 225 - 260 gram udap bear deterrent pepper spray cans have generated numerous testimonials from grateful customers like the following: see testimonials what about hunting in grizzly country? sportsmen, who harvest big game animals in grizzly country, should be aware that the sound of a gun shot might sound like a dinner bell to a wandering grizzly. some hunters, tracking down their "trophy elk", can be quite surprised when they find a grizzly has beat them to it. hunters who make a kill in grizzly country should make lots of noise as they carefully approach the carcass. they should also try to view the carcass from a distance to see if a grizzly is guarding it. the blood and gore at a kill site may attract a keen-nosed, opportunistic grizzly. many hunters who have killed animals and returned the next morning to pack out the meat, have been suddenly confronted by an aggressive bear who had claimed the kill overnight. if a kill site appears disturbed, but no bear is seen, it’s best to back off because the bear may be lying in cover nearby. a bear on a kill may refuse to back off, even when shots are fired into the ground nearby, and many sportsmen have been forced to relinquish their harvested game animal to a protective bear guarding its food supply. smart sportsmen who harvest big game animals in grizzly country try to pack out the meat the same day of the kill, or they carry the quartered carcass to a safe spot a few hundred yards from the bloody kill site and then hang the quarters high in a tree. acknowledgements udap industries, inc. would like to thank the following for their input on "bear safety tips" web page & booklet. we value your expertise. barrie k. gilbert - animal behavior/wildlife management - utah state university dr. steven herrero - bear behavioral studies -  university of calgary (author of "bear attacks" , lyons & bruford - publishers) ron aasheim - administrator, conservation education division - montana fish wildlife & parks steven p. french, m.d. - yellowstone grizzly foundation kevin frey - grizzly bear management specialist, yellowstone ecosystem - montana fish wildlife & parks james gore - national grizzly bear habitat coordinator - forest service kerry a. gunther - bear management specialist - yellowstone national park peter kummerfeldt - owner and chief instructor - survival consultant group dave lockman - education supervisor - wyoming game and fish department dave moody - wyoming game and fish department chris queen - wyoming game and fish department good sites on bear info http://www.direct.ca/cabc/ -bear attack survival by james (gary) shelton alaskan brown bear mauling - by keith rogan (kodiak, alaska coast guard & bear attack survivor) more on bear safety - an educational resource on bear habitats, behavior, etc. "outdoorsafe" - excellent info from survival instructor peter kummerfeldt. "bears" magazine - more articles on bear safety and knowledge. national geographic bear cam - live video from alaska's mcneil river sanctuary books we recommend self defense for nature lovers   by mike lapinski   stoneydale press publishing 1-800-232-7941     ($12.95 + s&h) mark of the grizzly   by scott mcmillion   falcon publishing, inc. bear attacks by stephen herrero   lyons & bruford, publishers bear attacks by kathy etling   safari press, inc bear aware   by bill schneider   falcon publishing, inc. videos we recommend bear attacks by stoney wolf productions  udap industries 1-800-232-7941 copyright notice - all rights reserved no part of this site www.udap.com including all text, illustrations, photographs, pictures or any other item contained in the pages of this site (www.udap.com) may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. for further information contact mark matheny, udap industries, 13160 yonder rd., bozeman, mt 59718 prpperpower@udap.com any and all violators will be prosecuted to the full extent of international law. you have been warned. wild animals are unpredictable! or call 1-800-232-7941 24 hrs. | home page | bear products | human products | law enforcement | holsters & accessories | | how to use | bear safety tips |testimonials | f.a.q.s |street safety | your story | dealer inquiries |  links | | order policies | order online | view cart | track order | alaska and canada orders | udap industries 13160 yonder road bozeman, mt 59718 pepperpower@udap.com copyright © 1999 udap industries, inc.. all rights reserved. revised: january 13, 2002.