scout leader mauled by black bear release date: 7/24/01scout leader mauled by black bear	a richardson, texas scout leader was treated and released at salida hospital this morning after being bitten by a bear and dragged from her tent. the incident occurred at the packerd high adventure boy scout camp about 1:30 a.m., july 24. according to colorado division of wildlife district manager ron dobson, the woman left the flaps open on her tent when she retired. she awoke when a black bear bite her on the hand and arm. the woman screamed, jerked her hand back and pulled her sleeping bag over her head. other campers were aroused when she screamed as the bear dragged the sleeping bag — with the woman still in it — out of the tent. several scout leaders drove the bear off by yelling and throwing stones at the bear. the victim suffered deep puncture wounds on her hand and arms. her injuries were treated at the emergency room at the regional medical center in salida. the scout camp is located about two miles south of poncha springs just off of highway 285. there were about 125 scouts and scout leaders in the camp at the time of the attack. the facility hosts scouts between the ages of 13 and 20. the woman plans to remain at the camp with her two sons for the remainder of the week. dobson said there is a history of bear problems over the past several years in the poncha springs area because of people feeding wildlife and not properly securing trash in the vicinity of the camp. “we have at least two bears in this area that have lost their fear of humans,” said dobson. “people should understand that if they don’t secure their trash or if they leave food out for the wildlife, they are contributing to the problem. we have a saying at the division that a fed bear is a dead bear.” division of wildlife officers will set traps for the bear and patrol the area tonight. once they locate the bear, it will be destroyed and tested for rabies. less than a week earlier wildlife officers destroyed a bear at the spanish peaks scout ranch in south-central colorado. that camp is visited by about 250 scouts each week. it also has had a recent history of visits from black bears. this is the second time a person was injured by a bear this summer. on july 8, a 16-year-old colorado springs boy was injured at a campsite west of gardner when a bear bit him as he slept outside near a campfire. the bear, which returned several times, was shot and killed by the boy’s uncle. the boy suffered minor injuries and was treated and released at a colorado springs hospital. wildlife officials are warning people who camp in colorado to take precautions to avoid encounters with black bears. things to remember in bear country campers: * keep your camp clean. * store food and garbage properly at all times. * keep your tent and sleeping bag free of all food smells. * store the clothes you wore while cooking or eating with your food. * burn all grease off grills and camp stoves. * wipe table and clean eating area thoroughly. * store your food safely. use bear proof containers. * store food and coolers suspended from a tree at least 10 feet off the ground and four feet out from the tree trunk. * dispose of garbage properly. secure it with your food, then pack it out. do not burn or bury the garbage. * sleep away from food areas. move some distance away from your cooking area or food storage sight. * store toiletries safely. store them with your food - the smell of toiletries may attract bears. * female campers should be advised the scent of a menstruating woman is sometimes an attractant to bears. recreational hikers: * hiking at dawn or dusk may increase your chances of meeting a bear. * use extra caution in places where hearing or visibility is limited, such as brushy areas, near streams, where trails round a bend, or on windy days. * reduce your chances of surprising a bear on the trail by making noise, talking or singing. * make sure children are close to you or within your sight at all times. * leave your dog at home or have it on a leash. if you meet a bear: * there are no definite rules about what to do if you meet a bear. in almost all cases, the bear will detect you first and will leave the area. bear attacks are rare compared to the number of close encounters. if you do meet a bear before it has had time leave an area, here are some suggestions: * stay calm. if you see a bear and it has not seen you, calmly leave the area. as you move away, make noise to let the bear discover your presence. * stop. back away slowly while facing the bear. avoid direct eye contact, as bears may perceive this as a threat. * give the bear plenty of room to escape. bears rarely attack people unless they feel threatened or provoked. * do not run. if on a trail, step off the trail on the downhill side and slowly leave the area. do not run or make any sudden movements. running is likely to prompt the bear to give chase, and you cannot outrun a bear. * speak softly. this may reassure the bear that you mean it no harm. try not to show fear. * fight back. if a black bear attacks you, fight back. black bears have been driven away when people have fought back with rocks, sticks, binoculars and even their bare hands. [return to dow]