up here travel tips - bears travelling in bear country almost everywhere in the north is considered bear country. polar bears inhabit the arctic coast and islands. grizzlies are found across the barrenlands and in parts of the boreal forest. black bears are found across the forested north and even travel through greenbelts of towns. many people consider it the icing on the cake to see a bear in the wild. encounters between bears and humans usually involve black bears. black bears are curious and generally not aggressive, but any bear can become aggressive at any time. when bears are a danger: a surprised or cornered bear may attack in self defense. a mother bear will attack to defend her cubs. early in the season, bears are thin from hibernation and emboldened by hunger. bears who have lost their fear of humans, generally by associating them with food, can become dangerous. old or wounded bears will attack more readily than young healthy bears. though not every bear attack is avoidable, there are steps to take to minimize your risks. on the trail: look out for bears and signs of bears, like piles of bear scat with berries in it, torn up stumps and logs and patches of upturned ground. avoid animal carcasses at all costs. if you see a bear, don’t try to get a closer look. if you see a cub, leave the area. make sure bears know you are around. shout, chat, sing, wear bear bells. at risk of stating the obvious, don’t feed the bears or other animals. travel with several other people. decide before you hit the trail what your group will do if you encounter a bear. if you have children with you, keep tabs on them and pick them up immediately if you see a bear. dogs can aggravate bears and coming running to you for protection. keep your dog on a leash. if you see a bear, report it to wildlife officers in the area you are travelling. in camp: set up camp in wide open spaces, away from berry patches and rivers where fish are spawning. avoid aromatic foods; freeze dried is a good option. cook 100 metres from your tent. store food and garbage 100 metres from your tent, suspended from trees where possible. don’t take the same clothes you wore cooking into your tent. cover your hair while cooking. avoid perfumes, toothpaste and other scented goods. store soap and detergent as if they were food. where possible use airtight storage containers for food, garbage and soaps. if you are fishing, dispose of entrails and bones in fast running streams. burn other garbage to ash when possible. don’t bury garbage. in case of attack: most bears will try to intimidate with a bluff charge. in that case, stand your ground ­ don’t turn and run. if a grizzly attacks: play dead by lying curled in a ball, legs drawn to your chest, hands clasped behind your neck, or face down, flat on the ground with your fingers twined behind your neck. if the attack last more than several minutes, fight back. if a black bear attacks: always fight back. for more information about bear behaviour and safety in bear country, see the government of the northwest territories web site or the yukon government’s renewable resources page. call wildlife officers in the area you plan to visit and ask about recent bear activities in that area. up here publishing, 2001