bear attack survival bear attack surviva l by james (gary) shelton bella coola valley british columbia, canada i have lived in a remote community on the coast of british columbia most of my life and have over 34 years of experience in dealing with bears under every circumstance imaginable. i have also done extensive research into the genetic and evolutionary basis for animal behaviour. for the past nine years i have made my living by providing bear encounter survival courses to government and company employees who work in the outdoors. more than 6,000 people have taken my training. the information in my bear safety training program is unique and is based on being a participant in nature rather than just an observer of nature. in 1994 i published my first book, bear encounter survival guide, which is now used by many government agencies and private corporations as a safety training manual, including the canadian department of fisheries & oceans and the u. s. fish & wildlife service in anchorage, alaska. in early 1996, this book was selected by the worker's compensation board of british columbia as one of their primary source materials for their new mandatory bear safety training policy for field workers. in 1998 i published my second book, bear attacks - the deadly truth. this book has been on the b.c. bestseller list for over eight months and has also become a 'must read' for people exposed to bears. bear attacks is based on direct interviews with victims and demonstrates the horrific results of defensive-aggressive and predatory attacks on people by both grizzlies and black bears. the chapters in this book have themes that clarify the different types of bear aggressive behaviour and circumstances of attacks, like: carcass defence, spray use against bears, and can grizzlies climb trees. this second work has really shook-up the preservationists because it shows how dangerous and misleading the propaganda is that they have foisted on the general public. this site is for all those people who like and appreciate bears but do not want to be injured or killed by one. unfortunately, our cultural belief system about nature has become so embedded with mythology about animals that many of the existing concepts about bears are dangerous. if you place a high value on yourself and your family, or if you place a high value on your employees who work in bear country, check out all the following pages. e-mail: jgs@direct.ca due to the large amount of e-mail i am receiving, and the fact that i am often away from the computer for long periods of time, i may not be able to respond to all inquiries. if you do not hear from me in five days, please fax me at 250-982-2353 or call me at 250-982-2316. book ordering training course encounters update travel advisory recent activities bear conservation human/bear conflict