black bear attack - 6/28/00 6/28/00 update on black bear attack in two medicine valley... park officials to destroy bear west glacier, mont.-- glacier national park rangers continue to search for the black bear that attacked and injured a hiker in the two medicine valley on monday, june 26, 2000. because of the bear's aggressive behavior towards humans, it will be destroyed when located, in accordance with the guidelines of the park's bear management plan. jason sansom, 24, of malstrom air force base in great falls, montana suffered puncture wounds to both arms after an unprovoked attack by a brown-colored black bear on the south shore trail of two medicine lake on monday afternoon. sansom and his wife had been on a day hike when the incident occurred. his wife was not injured. park rangers, with assistance from a paramedic with the boat concessionaire, responded to the scene and stabilized sansom. he was later transported to browning hospital where his wounds were treated. he was released later that night. sansom was able to take two photographs of the bear before he was attacked, which later helped park officials in confirming the bear's identity as the same one that had precipitated a temporary closure of the two medicine campground earlier this summer on june 13. in that instance, the bear had shown no fear of humans and resisted attempts by park rangers to haze it away from the area. in addition, numerous hikers reported seeing the bear along the south shore trail earlier in the day near the area where sansom was attacked. the bear again displayed no apparent fear of humans. glacier national park's bear management guidelines state that a black bear having received human food or garbage, displaying conditioned behavior to humans, causing property damage, and acting overly familiar with humans will be removed and/or destroyed. the goal of glacier national park's bear management policy is to ensure a natural and free-ranging population of grizzly and black bears. because the bear had exhibited aggressive behavior towards humans, trapping and relocating the bear was not an option. the south shore trail along two medicine lake remains closed as park rangers continue to search for the bear. baited culvert traps will also be set in the two medicine area to try and attract the bear. since this area is near the blackfeet reservation, park officials are working closely with tribal fish and wildlife employees to locate and remove the bear. due to the bear's aggressive behavior towards humans, two medicine campground is restricted to hard-side campers only (no tents). this restriction will be in effect until the bear is located and destroyed. black bear encounters that cause injury to humans are not common in glacier national park. the last incident occurred in 1978, at trout lake, in the camas creek drainage, when a camper was bit while in his sleeping bag, receiving puncture wounds to his arms and shoulders. the park has never had a fatality associated with a black bear. once again, park officials remind visitors that all bears can be dangerous and should not be approached under any circumstances. hikers are urged to familiarize themselves with recommended safety precautions while they are in bear country such as, carrying bear spray, making loud noise when hiking, only hiking during broad daylight, and never hiking alone. back to glacier park news