bear facts bear facts their hearing is more sensitive than a human's they stand upright to see farther. they run faster than 25 mph. they climb trees as fast as squirrels. the most common black bear sounds are grunts. the sound most often heard by people is a loud blowing, which means a black bear is nervous or afraid. cubs readily scream in distress, whine when approaching their mother or give a tremulous hum when nursing or comfortably warm. adults (and cubs) use their "voices" when in pain (bawling), in fear (moaning), in combat (bellowing) or when seriously threatened (deep-throated pulsing sound). unlike cats and dogs, black bears seldom, if ever, growl, although the fear-moans of treed or trapped bears are often mistaken for growls. they have color vision, which might explain why bears do most of their foraging for fruit in daylight. for night vision, they have a reflector system in their eyes that brightens night images and gives them their eye shine. black bears are classified as members of the older carnivora, and their teeth, claws, strength and size make them look like predators. however, they seldom catch anything larger than insects. their claws are tightly curved for tree-climbing, so black bears have an advantage over grizzly bears, deer and wild hogs when competing for acorns, nuts and fruits. cubs stay with their mothers till they are about 17 months old. most females in northern evergreen forest do not produce cubs until 5 to 8 years of age, while those in hardwood forest usually produce their first cubs at 3 or 4 years of age. this is do to food availability. most black bears use a different den each year. hibernation last up to 7 months in the northern region, but is shorter in the south. to survive long winters without eating, drinking, exercising or passing wastes, hibernating black bears will cut their metabolic rate in half. except for mothers with cubs, black bears are solitary animals. although black bears have a lifespan of 30 years, they rarely live that long because they die from human-related causes that kill them before they are 6 years old on average. although some black bears die from falling out of trees or being hit by cars, very few bears die from disease, making humans their greatest threat. bears have long-term memory and are recognized as one of the more intelligent mammals. 300 black bears saved by people just like you and me the number one environmental problem facing new jersey right now is the loss of open space. the little farms of our state are no longer able to compete with the huge farms of california and florida that send their produce by truck, train and plane to our stores. so our new jersey farmers are selling their land to developers, people with lots of money who turn the farms into houses, shopping malls, and the headquarters of big business so they can accumulate more money.    a ride on a new jersey road is just not the same as it used to be. where we used to be able to enjoy open farmland for miles and miles, we now travel on widened highways that eat up the land. and that's not all-they eat up animal habitats too.    in 1980 there were about 200 black bears living in the mountains and forest of new jersey. they had the water, the food, and the space to live comfortably. now we have to close to 2000! isn't it wonderful that our little state, third smallest in the nation, filled with 8 million people, still has enough quality habitat for 2000 bears? however, it seemed like it was all coming to an end for these magnificent creatures. with more and more land being taken from them, it was thought that they were getting too close for comfort. but it wasn't so much that they were maliciously intruding on property of home owners, it was just that there was no place left for them to go. imagine...where there was once a forest or a field, there are now 300 homes. is it really the bears' fault that they are seen in the area of those homes? or are they simply doing what they have always done? by the way, there has never been a black bear attack on a human being in the history of our state. when it comes to human beings, black bears are chickens! yet the n.j. department of fish and game made a decision to have hunters kill 300 black bears on this past september 18th. they said it was a way of controlling the population of an animal that was becoming a pest, but they were not to have their way. once realizing that black bears were going to be hunted, thousands of people took time from their busy lives to write, e-mail or telephone our state legislators, including governor christie whitman. a week before the proposed hunt, she called it off! as you read this they are trying to come up with new solutions to the problem of black bears in new jersey, but one solution will not be to kill them off. it is now realized that they are a wonderful addition to our state, an indicator that our environment is very much better than it once was.    we have 2000 large, beautiful predators  here in new jersey that roam wild and free. the people of our little, crowded state have spoke and the message was heard: leave them be! never think no one will listen, together we can make a difference. back to top home