bear incident chronology bear incidents when: september 14, 2000 species: black bear where: grand mesa, colorado activity: hunting human injuries: yes bear injuries: possible deterrent deployed: firearm basic description: black bear attacks hunters. cox news service reported the following attack on september 14, 2000. two archery hunters from missouri startled a black bear along buzzard creek east of vega reservoir and received minor injuries. one man was bitten on the buttocks, the other man bitten on his left thigh. a .44 caliber revolver, initially thrown at the bear, was ultimately discharged and frightened the animal away. both hunters walked out of the area, were treated and released at a local hospital. when: september 3, 2000 species: grizzly where: mcleod lake, british columbia activity: hunting human injuries: yes bear injuries: no deterrent deployed: none basic description: hunter surprises black bear feeding on berries and is attacked and seriously injured. from an associated press story on september 3, 2000. veteran hunter max tylee, 70, was seriously injured when he encountered a grizzly in heavy cover near mcleod lake, british columbia. hunting moose with his wife josie, max tylee ventured into dense brush without his rifle. max was bitten on his head and upper body. he remains in critical condition in a vancouver hospital. the bear also charged josie tylee, who retreated to her nearby truck for safety. provincial conservation officer gary van spengen said that efforts to locate the bear have been suspended after a reconstruction of the affair revealed that tylee had inadvertently walked to within 10 yards of the concealed bear. "this was not a predatory attack," van spengen said. when: august 27, 2000 species: grizzly where: skogan pass, in the "park" near calgary, alberta activity: hiking human injuries: yes bear injuries: no deterrent deployed: none basic description: hikers surprise grizzlies on trail. from a report in the calgary sun, august 28, 2000. in the second bear attack in just over 12 hours, two hikers surprised a pair of grizzlies feeding on berries. "they were just north of nakiska ski hill," said randy axani, a local conservation officer, "and a charging bear ripped the straps on one manõs backpack, then chased the other man as he fled." the second man was mauled for approximately 20 seconds, after he tripped and fell. the injured hiker, bitten and clawed on his head, leg and arms, was evacuated by a rescue team. when: august 26, 2000 species: grizzly where: spray lakes area, in the "park" near calgary, alberta activity: hiking human injuries: yes bear injuries: no deterrent deployed: none basic description: female hiker attacked by grizzly. from a report in the calgary sun, august 28, 2000. "a woman was slightly injured by a sub-adult grizzly feeding on berries, during early evening hours," said conservation officer randy axani. "theyõre so focused on feeding this time of year," he said, "itõs easy to unknowingly get too close." when: july, 2000 species: unknown where: glacier national park activity: hiking human injuries: yes bear injuries: no deterrent deployed: bear bell basic description: hikers attacked on glacier trail from deseret news august 23, 2000. backpackers kelly krpata, 26, and kim taffer, 27, were 51 miles into a 55-mile trek as they approached bullhead lake in glaciersõ swiftcurrent valley. the couple was talking, whistling, and had a bear bell attached to tafferõs pack. moments later, both had dropped to the ground in the standard defensive position, in response to a charging bear. krpata carried a canister of pepper spray clipped to a shoulder strap, but says he didnõt have sufficient time to reach it. "i just waited it out," he said. "it was on top of me about 10 seconds, and it did some good work in those 10 seconds. i was screamingé. i had my face buried in the dirt." he is recovering in a great falls hospital from bites on his thighs and hips. taffer said she heard the bear approach her, as she lay motionless. "i could see brown out of the corner of my eye, and it felt like it was about a foot away from my head," she said. "all of a sudden, it turned and walked away." park spokeswoman amy vanderbilt applauds their motionless response, and notes that krpataõs backpack and sleeping pad were shredded but provided the man with a measure of protection. park officials were examining bear droppings to determine the species of the attacker. when: july, 2000 species: grizzly where: glacier national park activity: hiking human injuries: yes bear injuries: no deterrent deployed: none basic description: two teen hikers attacked by bear from ôdeutsche presseõ release august 1, 2000. two teenage hikers survived a bear attack in yellowstone national park by dropping to the ground and remaining motionless, said park spokeswoman sheryl matthews. the hikers encountered two grizzly bears at close range, possibly a mother and cub, matthews said, but only one of the teens was injured. he sustained bite wounds on his wrist while protecting his neck and head. after the initial attack, the hikers attempted to return to the trailhead, but were again approached by the bears. this time, the bears only sniffed at the teens, before disappearing once more. the pair drove themselves to a local hospital where the injured teen was treated and released. table of contents   |   departments |   subscriptions