into the yukon wilderness 10 burns road whitehorse, yukon y1a 4y9 ph: 867-667-5652 fax: 867-393-6213 home page wildlife viewing explore the wild hwy guide english (pdf, 2192 kb) hwy guide french (pdf, 2786 kb) wildlife viewing through the seasons wildlife tips & etiquette wildlife viewing in faro swan haven & celebration of swans popular sites bird watching yukon bird list birds of faro (pdf, 793 kb) home for a song attracting winter birds bear safety into the yukon wilderness when hunting when fishing when mining/ exploring keep bears out of your backyard when you encounter a bear getting out there into the yukon wilderness bear safety traveling in the yukon wilderness involves certain risks, including the possibility of a bear attack. although the actual danger from bears may be small, it is real. the best defence is a cool head armed with good knowledge of bear ecology and behaviour. plan ahead before you start your trip… read up on the natural history and behaviour of bears. learn how to identify bear sign. learn about bear safety, from this booklet and other sources. take a first aid course. learn about the area you'll be traveling through. try to anticipate the most likely problems. consider bringing a can of bear spray. if you do, learn how to use it. take these precautions don't surprise a bear choose travel routes with good visibility where possible. stay alert and look ahead for bears. approach thickets from upwind if possible. make noise to let bears know you're coming. travel in groups. avoid traveling at night. choose a campsite well away from wildlife trails, human travel routes and areas with heavy bear signs or foods. don't crowd a bear don't approach a bear for a closer look or a better photo. use binoculars or a telephoto lens. don't attract a bear never feed a bear. don't bring greasy, smelly foods like bacon or canned fish. pack your food in airtight containers such as zip-lock bags or hard plasticboxes. thoroughly burn your garbage or pack it out in airtight containers. at night, move the food away from your tent-100 m (110 yd.) or more. put it up in a tree if you can. don't bring food or cosmetics into your tent. if you catch a fish, clean it far from camp and toss the guts in the water. is it a black bear or a grizzly bear ? if you see a bear… stay calm. stop and assess the situation. don't run, crouch down or play dead too soon. if the bear is unaware of you… avoid it if possible. leave the area, detour around the bear, or wait it out. if you can't avoid the bear, gently alert it to your presence by moving upwind, waving your arms, and calling out in a calm voice. if the bear approaches you or you surprise it… don't run. talk in a calm voice. slowly back away in the direction from which you came. if the bear keeps following you, stand your ground. group together to present a stronger front. remain firm but non-threatening as you give the bear time to think things over. if you're carrying bear spray, get it in your hand, point the nozzle away from you, and check the wind direction to make sure the spray dosn't blow back on you. try to figure out if the bear is acting in self-defence or if it's seeking food. if it's a grizzly that you've surprised at close range, is accompanied by cubs or has a carcass near by, it's probably attacking in self defence. if it's a black bear, it's probably seeking food. if the bear attacks… if the bear attacks, you have two choices: play dead or fight back. the right choice depends on whether the bear is acting in self-defence or seeking food. play dead if the bear seems to be attacking in self-defence, the best thing to do is playdead so the bear no longer feels threatened. don't play dead before the bear contacts you - especially when a bear is approaching at a distance - or you may actually encourage the bear to attack. play dead by dropping to the ground, face down, knees drawn up to your chest, and hands clasped tightly over the back of your neck. your backpack may help protect you. if playing dead works the bear will make brief contact with you, then will leave when it's convinced you're not dangerous. in this case, play dead as long as possible and don't move until the bear leaves the area. fight back you should fight back if you are attacked by: any black bear, any grizzly that stalks, or attacks in circumstances that do not involve cubs, a carcass, or surprise at close range, or any bear that breaks into a tent or building. these bears are motivated by food seeking rather than self defence. you need to fight back with all your energy with whatever you have. kick, punch or hit the bear with a rock, chunk of wood or whatever is handy. a bear's nose is a good place to strike. using bear spray if a bear approaches slowly or follows at a distance, fire two or three short bursts of spray between you and the bear while you continue backing away. the spray will create a cloud of deterrent which may stop the bear. but make sure you have enough left to spray the bear in the face at short distance if it keeps coming. if a bear is charging, stand your ground, fire a couple of short bursts to create a cloud in front of you, then save remaining spray for use at close range if necessary. for more information contact the department of renewable resources for more information about bears. home | wildlife viewing & wilderness travel | wildlife, fish & ecology | hunting, fishing & trapping protected areas & special places | environment | agriculture | publications, library & gis