bears in great smoky mountains national park black bears in great smoky mountains national park the black bear symbolizes the invaluable wilderness qualities of great smoky mountain national park. its recovery from near extinction in the smokies to its present population of 400-600 is a result of the refuge offered by the park. yet, in spite of this protection, bears are dying unnecessarily due to the improper disposal of garbage. poll: what is your favorite part of the national park? vote here. . . . sign up for our free newsletter , "what's happening in the smokies?" subscribe email: or subscribe by email . departments . . accommodations . . camping . . hiking . . streams & waterfalls . . fishing . . wildlife . . trails . . cades cove . . elkmont . . lodges . . cherokee indians . . mountain people . . logging camps . . pioneer cooking . . storytelling . . park policies . employment press releases . email . . . . the black bear symbolizes the invaluable wilderness qualities of great smoky mountain national park. its recovery from near extinction in the smokies to its present population of 400-600 is a result of the refuge offered by the park. yet, in spite of this protection, bears are dying unnecessarily due to the improper disposal of garbage. a bear is an opportunist by nature. in the wild it feeds on whatever is readily available. on its way to a ripe berry patch, it may stop to devour a yellowjacket nest or roll over a log to feast on termites and other insects. the bear's remarkable sense of smell also leads it to unnatural foods, such as garbage. this places these animals in immediate danger. food odors and garbage attract bears to campgrounds, picnic areas, residential neighborhoods, businesses, and dump sites. and while the presence of humans will keep most of them away at first (wild bears are naturally afraid of humans and human scent) ultimately the temptation will draw them in, usually at night. . . . please do your part in park campgrounds and picnic areas: 1. keep a clean site by properly disposing of: •all garbage, including fruit rinds and cores •aluminum foil (even from grills) that has been used to cook or store food. •plastic wrap and bags that have stored food. •cans and jars that are empty. 2. pick up food scraps around your site. 3. never leave food or coolers unattended (unless inside a vehicle or hard-sided camper). 4. wipe down table tops before vacating your site. 5. if a bear approaches your site, pack up your food and trash. if necessary, attempt to scare the animal away with loud shouts, by banging pans together, or even throwing rocks and sticks at it. if the bear is persistent, move away slowly to your vehicle or another secure area. please do your part at rental cabins, chalets, motels, commercial campgrounds, or residential areas: 1. never leave unattended food or garbage outside. 2. do not feed birds between april and november unless you use feeders that bears cannot reach and that have spill pans to prevent seeds from reaching the ground. 3. do not leave pet food outside (especially overnight). 4. bear-proof bee hives, compost piles, and gardens with electric or chain-link fence. 5. do not leave food as bait for any animals or leave food scraps on the ground. 6. if a bear approaches, move your family and any food indoors immediately. a night-active bear thus begins a pattern of behavior that usually ends with its death. the animal loses its fear of humans as it begins to associate human scent with the reward of food. such a bear will soon become day-active, in developed areas, putting it at still greater risk. it may panhandle along roadsides until it is accidentally killed by a car or injures a visitor and has to be euthanized by park rangers. it may ingest toxic material from garbage and die. or it may become an easy target for poachers who will shoot a bear for its gall bladder, a valuable commodity on the asian folk medicine market. since the mid-1960s, the national park service has gone to considerable effort and expense to keep human-related food away from bears. all trash cans in picnic areas and campgrounds have bear-proof lids and several bear-proof dumpsters have been installed. regulations prohibiting the feeding of bears are strictly enforced. unfortunately, people do not always use trash cans. food is sometimes left unattended at campsites or cabins. partially burned trash in fire rings and scraps of uneaten food are left behind. even bird feed or pet food left outdoors at a cabin or chalet can start problems. some of these things may seem insignificant, but they initiate behavior patterns which often cannot be reversed. in essence, feeding bears kills bears. read about bear attack which occurred in may 2000. please do your part in the park's backcountry: 1. hang food and anything with strong odors (toothpaste, bug repellent, soap, etc.) at least 10 feet off the ground and 4 feet from a tree or limb, or use special food storage boxes and cable systems available at some sites, or use bear-proof food canisters available for sale or rent at visitor centers in the park. these may be required at some sites. check with the park backcountry office prior to your trip. 2. do not cook or store food in or near your tent (food odors on tent or gear may attract a bear). 3. if a bear approaches, frighten it by yelling, banging pans together, or throwing rocks. 4. pack out trash - don't bury it. photo tour of the smokies a bear's natural diet consists of: berries and acorns, 59%; grasses and forbs, 28%; insects and meat, 13%. smoky mountain coupons townsend | knoxville | cherokee