uw resnet directions uw residence-network directions 2001-12-14 this document describes the directions ist is pursuing for the management of access to campus and external bandwidth for the uw students who live in the residences that have provisioned their rooms with connections to the uw campus network. this set of uw campus-network connections is known as "resnet". introduction background the introduction of the first 500 resnet connections in village 1 in october of 1997 led almost immediately to the saturation of the campus network's external bandwidth. with the start of the winter 1999 term, ist introduced an automated mechanism to limit excessive resnet external use. with the start of the fall 2000 term, that was expanded to campus+external use, to deal with the growing (ab)use of on-campus systems as tunnels for off-campus traffic. for a detailed account of the evolution of the mechanism to cope with various forms of excessive use, see coping with the impact of networked residences at the university of waterloo. to date, there is little evidence to support any claim that uw-assigned academic work requires uw students to consume any significant portion of uw's external bandwidth. there is also no evidence to support any claim that all non-resnet use is mission-relevant, but that must be pursued outside the scope of resnet considerations. resource management the uw resnet environment now encompasses 4083 (78%) of the 5262 spaces provided by housing and the four federated/affiliated institutions, each with a dedicated 10mbps switched-ethernet connection to the uw campus network. a limit mechanism and a fair-share minimum guaranteed bandwidth mechanism are in place to regulate consumption of uw's shared-bandwidth resources. the mechanism of identifying resnet users by their assigned ip address and imposing limits to prevent excessive use has required that ist develop a collection of small programs that ... configure each resnet switch to bind the ethernet address of the resident's computer to the switch port to which the computer is connected; collect those ethernet addresses from the switches and add them to the campus-network dhcp server, which assigns a predetermined ip address to the resident's computer each time the computer connects to the switch port; configure each resnet router to bind the ip address of the resident's computer to its ethernet address; collect by-ip-address traffic counts from the resnet routers several times an hour and maintain daily and term-to-date totals of use, exclude use of an on-campus server from the traffic counts if it is required for and can be used only for specific high-volume academic applications (for example, downloading multimedia learning-resource materials, or interacting with the quest student information system); this requires that the facility administrator has configured the server so that it cannot be subverted for use as an off-campus tunnel; instruct a resnet router to move a resident into a special "constrained bandwidth" queue when the resident has exceeded a limit. there are various motivations to find additional or alternate mechanisms that will: continue to address uw's shared-resource management obligations; simplify the set of resnet configuration and control software that ist maintains; provide resnet users with more flexible conditions so that they can, within reason, transfer larger-volume objects outside of uw's peak-hours periods without degrading service to other uw users in the resnet and non-resnet constituencies; enable resnet users with portable computers to move between switch ports in the residence (for example, when working from a friend's room or a common area); enable alternate methods of connecting residence computers (for example, wireless transmission between computers and network-connected base stations), provided that the alternate methods still provide the ability to identify and hold the user of an ip address accountable and constrain excess use. alternate means of connecting resnet computers the current method serves two purposes. it meets the basic authenticated user trust requirement for connection of a device to the campus network by identifying the resnet user by the preassigned ip address in a manner that makes it impossible for the connection to use any other ip address, and it meets the resnet resource-management requirment by counting traffic by ip address to control excessive use by imposing per-user limits. in order to be able to consider alternate approaches that do not bind the resnet user to a permanent ip address associated with a permanent connection to a particular port on a particular switch, each alternate approach must still meet the authenticated-user trust and resource-management limiting requirements. each such approach must therefore provide us with a mechanism that identifies and authenticates the person whose computer is attempting to use a network connection, assigns an ip address to that computer for use during the connection, rejects any traffic from that connection that is using a different ip address, reclaims the ip address at the end of the connection, keeps an audit log with per-connnection records that contain at least the following userid, ipaddress, startdatetime, enddatetime, bytessent, bytesrcvd and has a external-interface means of dynamically constraining the access of those who have exceeded their limits. this must work in a manner that is independent of the types of computers connected to the network. and if we can achieve an acceptable means of meeting the resnet resource-management requirement in a manner that does not require per-user limits, then the last item is not required and the audit log reduces to records containing just userid, ipaddress, startdatetime, enddatetime we know of no products that achieve this, but we will continue looking as part of our general technology-tracking activities. roger watt, ist. this document will be updated from time to time as investigations progress.