uw campus network management uw campus network management 2001-12-18 network terminology and description ... locality of reference; level-one and level-two networks; transmission-layer switching and network-layer routing; client-server workgroups management structure ... ap-ist, ucist, cnag, ist established practices ... acceptable use, cabling-system installation, names and numbers, trusted and untrusted devices ist campus-network administration ... attachment points; network monitoring; requests for connections, subnet numbers, domain addresses, etc ist contacts management structure ap-ist and ucist authority for the formation of policy for uw's network and computing resources belongs to the associate provost, information systems and technology (ap-ist), in consultation with ucist, the university committee on information systems and technology. campus networks advisory group cnag exists to make recommendation to ucist on the evolution of facilities, services, procedures and policies for the campus network, to facilitate communication and interaction among the various computing-support areas on campus, and to help coordinate decision making on related campus-wide issues. information systems and technology ist has responsibility for the campus network and related communications facilities within established practices. these include the planning, design, installation, operation, and administration of the campus backbone (level-one) network and its transmission systems and backbone and building-point-of-presence switching and routing devices, the connection of external networks and level-two networks to the level-one network, the routing of traffic over the level-one network, the assignment of network names and addresses, and the central network-administration servers and services. academic and academic-support units in the academic-support sector (and in the academic sector, where requested), ist provides design, installation, and administration of the corridor and corridor-to-office transmission systems that comprise the various level-two networks, and the connection of devices to those transmission systems. in each faculty, some or all of the responsibility for these functions is handled by the faculty's computing-office staff under the authority of the associate dean of computing. established practices cabling-system installation all cabling and installation work must meet the uw-established specifications. names and numbers for the purposes of communication within the campus network and with the rest of the worldwide internet community, uw's official "electronic identity" consists of the internet network number "129.97.0.0" and the internet domain name "uwaterloo.ca". these are uw resources administered by ist. acceptable use traffic transmitted over the campus network and its external connection(s) must be in compliance with university-established policies, directives, procedures, and conditions as exemplified by the statement on use of uw computing and network resources, this document, and any agreements between the university and external entities administering resources to which the campus network is connected. examples of the latter include the onet networking corporations's membership terms and conditions. the administrative entity serviced by a level-two network has authority to establish additional acceptable-use conditions for traffic that originates and terminates solely within that level-two network and its lower-level networks. trusted and untrusted devices a device is deemed to be trusted if its network connection is via a mechanism that identifies the person who will be held accountable for a specific instance of its use, and that mechanism is under the control of a uw department with employees responsible for dealing with misuse. examples include: a device that isolates the user from the network so that the user must first login through an "authentication" server before being able to use the network to communicate with anything else, and the server keeps an audit-trail log; a device that is connected to the campus network via a uw resnet residence-room connection; a device in an individual's private office and intended for that individual's use exclusively. otherwise, the device is deemed to be untrusted and may not be connected unless its functioning has been so severely constrained that it can be used only to communicate with specific "information server" devices in the campus network or beyond, and only in the ways intended by the providers of those servers. incidents of misuse from the device will require its removal from the network until it can be reconnected in a "trusted" manner. ist campus-network administration attachment points ist provides a port on a switch or router on the level-one network as the point of attachment for the external network links and each level-two network. these switches and routers are protected by ups equipment providing clean power and battery backup sufficient to protect against short-duration power outages. network monitoring ist monitors selected devices in the level-one and level-two networks to detect loss-of-connectivity troubles as they occur. information on scheduled outages and problem resolutions is posted to the "uw.network" newsgroup. similar notifications from the onet networking operation centre and beyond are automatically posted to this newsgroup if they contain the string "waterloo". other notifications are posted to the "uw.network.external" newsgroup. ist collects network-utilization data for the switches and routers that interconnect the external and level-two networks to the level-one network. daily and monthly reports are posted to the "uw.network.stats" newsgroup. requests for network numbers and domain addresses uw's ip subnet numbers and ip addresses are a finite resource. assignments of specific numbers cannot be guaranteed to be permanent. to minimize the need for manual renumbering in instances where currently-assigned numbers must be changed, those who are responsible for network-connected devices should configure those devices to obtain their ist-assigned ip address via the campus dhcp service. request for ip subnet number. the creation of a new level-two or lower-level network requires that ist assign an ip subnet number to the new network. any organizational unit contemplating a new subnet is advised to contact its cnag representative. there is a finite supply of ip subnet numbers, so a new subnet number will not be assigned unless the request is the result of an existing subnet having grown to the point where more than 90% of the available addresses are in active use, or unless both the cnag representative and ist's manager of network systems integration agree that there is some special technical condition for which there is no solution other than assigning a new subnet. request for ip address and device connection. when ist receives a request to install a cabling-system connection and/or assign an ip address to the device that is to use that connection, we first obtain confirmation from the cnag representative before proceeding. non-uw network numbers. an organizational unit should not attempt to obtain its own ip network number. for security reasons, the only traffic permitted through the campus-network external connection is traffic that is destined to or originating from an ip address within the subnets of uw's ip network number. there are situations in which the objective is to create a lower-level network that will be invisible within and external to the campus network. rfc1918 provides a set of class a, class b, and class c network numbers that may be used for this purpose. request for webserver addresses. ist will accept a request for a domain-name address such as "www.xxxxx.uwaterloo.ca" pointing to a webserver computer provided that: the requested "xxxxx" clearly and unambiguously designates a uw organizational unit (faculty, department, group, or federated/affiliated college), or a project of such an organizational unit, and the request is submitted to ist with confirmation from the entity that has administrative authority for the computer that will house the corresponding web material. any situation in which uw sponsorship is not clear will be referred by ist to the relevant member of cnag or ucist for guidance. personal-webspace addresses. to enable a simple form of addressing for the personal homepage for uw faculty, staff, and students, a facility exists that will redirect a url of the form "http://uwaterloo.ca/~uwuserid/" (where "uwuserid" is your uwdir userid) to the url of your choice. you activate this by adding that url to your uwdir entry. to do this, see the "signon with uwdir" and "update your uwdir data" documents at uwdir and authentication services. request to facilitate non-uw domain-name addresses. ist will accept a request to provide limited domain name system service for a non-uw domain provided that: the non-uw domain represents some external collective entity in which a uw organizational unit is clearly an on-going participant in support of a uw research, instructional, or administrative function, the purpose of the request is to enable the uw organizational unit to house information for the non-uw entity on a uw computer (eg, a webserver) because the non-uw entity is incapable of having its own facilities, and the request from the uw organizational unit is accompanied by confirmation from the non-uw entity and confirmation from the uw entity that has administrative authority for the computer that will house the information. any situation in which uw sponsorship is not clear will be referred by ist to the relevant member of cnag or ucist for guidance. ist contacts loss-of-connectivity trouble reports to report an on-campus network outage, contact the ist chip helpdesk or mail to the ist request system. requesting cabling-system installations mail to the ist request system. requesting assignment of names and numbers for ip addresses, dns hostnames, ip subnet numbers, appletalk zone names, and reporting changes to registration information ... mail to hostmaster. roger watt, ist.