uw campus network uw campus network 2002-01-30 purpose * uw directives * network overview connections from laptops, the residences, home computers topology diagrams * statistics * administration terminated and deprecated facilities * references purpose uw's mission is to advance learning and knowledge through teaching, research, and scholarship. uw's computing and network resources are provided so that uw students, faculty, and staff can pursue their respective activities in support of uw's mission, as per policy 66 and the statement on use of uw computing and network resources. the campus network and its external connections are provided by the university for use within the context of those directives. they are resources that must be shared and used appropriately by uw's community of 25,000 students, faculty, and staff. in the absence of unlimited bandwidth at zero cost, all members of the uw community are responsible for ensuring that use that is not related to uw's mission does not impact on the availability for use that is, and any need to increase capacity is due to the growth of mission-relevant use. the network overview network description ... assigned network names and numbers; terminology (internet, intranet, extranet, internet); locality of reference, transmission-layer switching (ethernet), network-layer routing (ip), integrated switching/routing; client-server workgroup computing systems backbone topologies ... [ fibre | switching | routing ] how do i get an internet account? external connectivity: region, province, country, world ... onet, ca*net3, and the rest of the internet guaranteed-minimum bandwidth allocations, description uw network-upgrade projects ... summary and background connections for laptop computers, wired and wireless a network authentication mechanism provides plug-in access via your uwdir userid/password. currently, there are network-authentication ports in mc-2061 and in the library (davis centre, dana porter, and fes map). an initial deployment of userid-authenticated 802.11b wireless access in dc and certain parts of mc is now in the testing stage, as one of uw's bell university labs projects. wireless-access projects are also underway in the faculty of engineering. a waterloo wireless "cooperative" is also in its formative stages in the waterloo area. connections in the campus residences existing facilities and established plans uw resnet: procedure for handling excessive use; past history and future directions; resnet-administrator tools connections from home computers for low-speed ip connectivity from home, uw provides a dial-up modem pool of 33.6kbps modems. for higher-speed ip connectivity from home, uw has a "preferred provider" agreement with bell for its sympatico high-speed edition service. uw seeks to enhance its connectivity within the local community by completing direct-connect agreements with major internet service providers in the kw area. such connections currently exist between uw and the homes and organizations served by fibretech and sentex. statistics network size modem pool ... yesterday, by month, explanation; last several years router and switch interfaces and 12-month projection resnet traffic by day, last 7 days, and term; guaranteed-minimum bandwidth reports uw external traffic ... network administration and operation campus network management ... management authorities and responsibilities; campus networks advisory group (cnag); conditions of use, user authentication, trusted and untrusted devices; network monitoring and status reports; requests for addresses and connections, requests for dns service for non-uw domains; ist contacts ip and appletalk registrations ... information that must be submitted to ist when requesting an ip subnet number, an ip device address, or an appletalk zone firewalls and uw security practices ... repeaters, switches; bridges; routers, access-control rules; application-layer constraints, proxy servers terminated or deprecated facilities 2000-02: sytek localnet terminated 1997-08: datapac terminated references historical the national netnorth network (1983) and the provincial onet network (1988) a nation goes online: canada's internet history hobbes' internet timeline technical ca domain information internet domain survey, matrix information and directory services internet traffic report from andover.net internet standards docsis (high-speed home ip service over cable tv) adsl forum (high-speed home ip service using the same line as the phone) gigabit ethernet alliance, 10 gigabit ethernet resource site optical internetworking forum roger watt, ist.