uw guaranteed-minimum bandwidth guaranteed-minimum bandwidth 2002-01-15 bandwidth congestion-management algorithms have been in use on uw's general-internet and university/ca*net3 external links since 2001-06-25. overview the technical name is "class-based weighted fair queuing with weighted random early detection" (cb-wfq/wred). it is based on our defining fair-share proportions of the external bandwidth for the resnet and the non-resnet constituencies ("classes"). we use the percent that each constituency represents of the total uw population. this benefits the entire campus. it provides a fairer environment for both the resnet and non-resnet consumers of uw's external bandwidth, so that one constituency cannot be consuming more than its fair share at the expense of the other constituency. class-based weighted fair queuing, for congestion control. the cb component defines each "class" and specifies the percent of the total bandwidth that it is to be guaranteed when the link is saturated. when the link is saturated, the wfq queuing mechanism gives each concurrent traffic flow (a specific conversation between two computers) an equal share of the bandwidth allocated to the class and discards packets from flows that are attempting to send more than that equal share. weighted random early detection, for congestion avoidance. wred is activated when the link is approaching saturation; it discards packets from flows that are contributing the most toward the saturation. with cb-wfq, the wred mechanism is applied separately to the traffic in each class. the class definitions and percent allocations are implemented by ist in the uw external router (for traffic leaving uw), and by onet networking in its routers at the toronto ends of the uw links (for traffic coming to uw). impact as a result of cb-wfq/wred, the bandwidth being consumed by one constituency can only be greater than the constituency's guaranteed minimum allocation if the total consumption across all constituencies is less than the total bandwidth, and one transmission can only consume more than an equal share of the available bandwidth if some other transmissions are consuming less than their share. this regulates consumption on an instantaneous basis, both between and within the constituencies. the impact can be seen in the resnet bandwidth reports. in addition, the resnet limits mechanism regulates resnet consumption on a last n days basis. as we continue to gain confidence in the effect of cb-wfq/wred, we will continue to relax the last-n-days resnet limits to whatever extent seems safe. bandwidth-class allocations winter 2002 fall 2001 roger watt, ist.