uw local connectivity uw campus network:local-community connectivity last updated 2001-12-22. previous version 2001-11-15. initial version 1999-08-19. objective one of the objectives for the uw campus network is that it be well connected within the major uw-external communities that are of interest to uw. at the provincial, national, and international levels, uw's membership in the provincial onet networking corporation currently provides that connectivity. however, there is currently no municipal/regional local-community "point of presence" for the direct interconnection of the networks operated by the major internet service provider (isp) companies that provide connectivity for the community's residents, businesses, and public-sector entities. in some extreme cases, those isps are not even interconnected anywhere within canada, and thus traffic between uw and the local-community entities serviced by those isps travels to some interconnection point in the us on one path, and back from the us into canada on another path, and is subject to poor transit times whenever any link along the way is congested. some of the businesses in the community are high-tech companies with which uw faculty members conduct joint research activities, and some of the residents of the community are uw students, faculty, and staff interacting from home with computing-server facilities at uw. therefore, in 1999-08, uw's ist department temporarily embarked on direct interconnections between the uw network and the area's major isps, in order to improve the state of uw's connectivity within the local community, until there is a broader alternative that will benefit everyone (such as a connect ontario municipal/regional network), to which ist could then connect uw's campus network. until then, the following are the terms under which ist is pursuing temporary direct interconnections with local isps. such connections currently exist with: 1999-05-25: sentex communications 2001-12-18: fibretech telecommunications and ist is always willing to pursue discussion with others. general considerations ist and {isp} both see value in improving the path between those members of the community who can benefit from a local connection of the uw and the {isp} networks, until such time as one or both of us sees a more encompassing alternative. ist and {isp} agree to create that connection at uw as an experiment that we will keep in place for as long as we both agree that it continues to be useful, that no money will change hands between us and that neither uw nor {isp} assumes any financial or other obligations on behalf of the other. ist and {isp} agree that we will each make our own reasonable efforts in accordance with our own priorities to identify and resolve any operational problems that might occur, that either of us can terminate the experiment for any reason at any time, but that we will both attempt to give the other party as much advance warning of that as we can. ist and {isp} agree that neither will publicize the existence of the interconnect except at a time and in a manner agreeable to both of us. technical considerations unless there are compelling reasons otherwise, ist will provide a port on one of the campus-network ethernet switches as the demarcation point, and will provide rack space (assumed to be less than one vertical foot), power (assumed to be no more than that required by the average pc), and ups support for any {isp}-owned network-interface device that will be installed and thereafter supported by {isp} as {isp}'s side of the demarcation point. {isp} understands that ist's upses are to protect against short-term power fluctuations, not to protect against user-detectable power outages. {isp} will work with ist's manager of communications support to coordinate the installation of the {isp}-owned transmission link that will terminate at the ist-specified demarcation point, and to arrange access to {isp}'s equipment as needed. {isp} will be the "customer of record" for that transmission link. {isp} will work with ist's manager of network systems integration to coordinate the exchange of routing information for the uw network and the {isp} network numbers that service its municipal/regional customers. uw concerns ist is eager to consider extending the experiment to include other major isps in the community that may be interested. however, ist cannot justify the costs of any significant impact on uw resources in order to accommodate a large number of interested isps. ist will therefore pursue offers from other isps on a case-by-case basis in terms of the overall benefit to the members of the uw community. roger watt, ist.