uw resnet excessive use excessive use from a resnet-connected computer 2002-01-13 query your resnet campus+external usage to date? every term, a very small minority of those with resnet connections repeatedly consume far more than the per-user fair share of uw's bandwidth. in 1998, ist established a system of limits, based on experiences to date and in consultation with ucist. utilization patterns demonstrate that these limits impact only that small minority of the residents. the limits are subject to change in the future based on further experience and evolving mechanisms for conserving resources to maximize their availability for the largest number of users. limits use of uw's internal and external network resources from a resnet-connected computer is excessive in the context of uw's mission if the volume of on-campus plus external traffic to and from that computer exceeds any of the following limits. this does not mean "all use that is within these limits is acceptable". problems arising from use for purposes other than those intended by the university in your role as a member of the uw community will be pursued as misuse. limit constraint period if limit exceeded (1) 500mb (megabytes) in the last 7 days 08:30-22:00 monday-thursday 08:30-17:00 friday 13:00-17:00 saturday 13:00-22:00 sunday (2) 1500mb in the last 7 days 00:00-24:00 daily all traffic outside the local residence network (see topology diagrams) is counted, 24 hours a day, every day. the limits are checked only if you have consumed more that the per-resnet-user fair share for the day. exceeding (1) or (2) will move you into the constrained-bandwidth queue for the duration of the corresponding constraint period. the constrained-bandwidth queue provides very-low-speed access to/from computers outside the local residence network. initially, the queue's bandwidth is sufficient for text-only applications, but the queue becomes more congested as the number of people in the queue increases during the constraint period. see method for an algorithmic summary of the process by which the totals are accumulated and the constraints are applied. for recent usage statistics, see the resnet daily report. for more detail, see the history and directions documents. recent modifications 2001-06-25activated minimum guaranteed bandwidth fair-share queuing. 2001-09-01the residence administrations provided funding to increase uw's external bandwidth and resnet's minimum guaranteed share of that bandwidth. 2001-10-07limits (1) and (2) were increased by 43% by changing from "mb in last 10 days" to "mb in last 7 days", and the hours of constraint for exceeding (1) were reduced by 13%, from a total of 102 hours per week to a total of 89 hours per week (an increase of 20% in the number of non-constraint hours). 2001-11-23limit (1) was increased by 67% from "300mb in last 7 days" to "500mb in last 7 days", an increase of 138% since the start of the term. background uw's mission is to advance learning and knowledge through teaching, research, and scholarship. uw is not an internet service provider. an isp is an organization whose mission is to provide internet connectivity to other entities. uw does not provide internet connectivity to non-uw entities. uw's computing and network resources are provided so that uw students, faculty, and staff can pursue their respective activities in support of uw's mission, as per policy 66 and the statement on use of uw computing and network resources. extending the campus network into the student residences managed by uw and its federated/affiliated institutions was one part of the objective to enable high-speed connectivity from the campus network into the homes of uw students, faculty, and staff (see the teaching and learning section of the 1998 directions statement published by ucist). in deciding to use the resnet connection in your residence room, it is important that you understand that that is why it exists. the campus network and its external connections are resources that must be shared and used appropriately by uw's community of more than 20,000 students, faculty, and staff. all members of the uw community are responsible for ensuring that use that is not related to uw's mission does not impact on the availability of a resource for use that is, and any need to increase the capacity of a resource is due to the growth of mission-relevant use. roger watt, ist.