ip requests and registrations ip requests and registrations 2001-12-18 requests for assignment subnet registration device registration txt record definitions requests for assignment a request for the assignment of an ip subnet number or the assignment of an ip address is to be mailed to hostmaster with the complete information needed for registration as specified in the appropriate section below. a request submitted by any person other than the cnag prepresentative responsible for the requestor's constituency will be forwarded to the cnag representative for confirmation before being processed further. no device may be connected to the network until its ip address has been assigned and registered. subnet registration the following information about each ip subnet in the campus computer network is recorded in the domain name system data. name.net in a 129.97.subnetnumber.0 in hinfo "parent_subnetname router_name" "protocol_type" in txt "orgunit unit,subunit,group" in txt "admin uwuserid" in txt "contact uwuserid" in txt "location list of buildings" in txt "date yyyy-mm-dd" there are various ways to derive the name that has been assigned to a subnet number by using some form of "dns query" utility. for example, for subnet 128, a query for 129.97.128.0 will tell you that this is "uw.net.uwaterloo.ca". a query to display all of the dns entry for that name will display the information shown above. the purpose of the txt records is described below. a record for orgunit, admin, or contact is only included if the information for the subnet is different than the information for the parent_subnet within which the subnet is contained. device registration in a similar fashion, information about each device in the campus computer network is recorded in the domain name system data. hostname in a 129.97.subnetnumber.hostnumber in hinfo "manufacturer model" "operating_system_name" in txt "orgunit unit,subunit,group" in txt "admin identifier" in txt "contact identifier" in txt "location bldg,room[,etc]" in txt "date yyyy-mm-dd" a txt record for orgunit, admin, or contact is only included if the information for the device is different than the information for the subnet in which the device is contained. example: a campus server watserv1 in a 129.97.128.116 in hinfo "sun sparc20" "solaris" in txt "location mc,1061" in txt "date 2001-08-15" example: an individual's workstation moa in a 129.97.108.74 in hinfo "apple macintosh" "macos" in txt "contact rwwatt" in txt "location mc,1065" in txt "date 1994-08-25" txt record definitions orgunit: identifies the community of users serviced. if the community spans multiple groups in a subunit, then no group will be registered. if the community spans multiple subunits in a unit, then no subunit will be registered. for computing systems that are funded for general campus-wide use across the academic and/or non-academic units, the orgunit designation will be one of {academic admin campus} depending on whether it is for academic groups only, or non-academic groups only, or both. the subnets that comprise the campus backbone network are designated "campus". the major units are designated as ahs, arts, eng, envst, math, sci, and lib. for example, a subnet dedicated to the groundwater research group in the earth sciences department in the science faculty would be recorded as "sci,earthsci,groundwater". for subnets in the non-academic units, unit will be "admin" and subunit will be the department name. for example, a subnet containing only computing systems that serve the registrar's office would be recorded as "admin,registrar". registrations for ist are recorded as "ist". admin: identifies the uwdir "uwuserid" of the person who exercises policy-level authority, in accordance with established uw directives, on behalf of orgunit for all matters pertaining to the computing system (or, for a subnet, for all of the computing systems within the subnet). contact: identifies the uwuserid of the person designated by admin as having the authority and responsibility to take immediate action to eliminate a network-impact problem being caused, whether by a computing system or by a user. in order to provide a course of action when the contact cannot be located, contact and admin may not be the same person. location: for a device, is the building-code value and room number where the device is installed; for a subnet, is the set of buildings (or floors in one building) spanned by the cabling system that forms that subnet. date: is the yyyy-mm-dd specification for the date on which this entry was last updated. instead of a uwuserid value, the admin or contact may be specified as a generic uw email address ... for example, the email address for a list of people that provide the intended function. roger watt, ist.