uw next-generation campus network provisioning the campus for the next-generation internet 1999-09-27 objective the uw "next-generation network" objective is the continuous evolution of a robust high-speed sustainable network infrastructure to serve current and future needs for communication within each of the six faculties and the academic-support sector, between those constituencies, with central facilities, with external "communities of commonality", and with the internet in general. phases phase one the focus of phase one is the integration of 10mbps, 100mbps, and 1000mbps ethernet (transmission-layer) switching with ip (network-layer) routing. from 1997-08 through 1998, 12 core-class and over 150 workgroup-class cisco catalyst switches were purchased, configured, and installed. the workgroup switches service over 3000 computers in the academic, academic-support, and campus-residence sectors. technical overview topology diagrams ... [ core fibre | switching | routing ] the networked-residence example remaining work phase two an estimated additional 370 workgroup-class switches are still required in order to connect each of the remaining 10,000 computers in the campus network to a port on a switched-ethernet device. next phases the word next is the cornerstone of the "next generation" concept; the process is one of continuous evolution. subsequent phases will include the following. evaluation and introduction of ethernet and ip quality-of-service delivery mechanisms. tools for switch-configuration administration, ip address-assignment administration, and network-port user authentication. ip-based applications software for electronic commerce, voice-over-ip computer-telephony integration, and ip multicast (including video-over-ip desktop videoconferencing and distance education). migration to gigabit ethernet where needed. eventually, progression beyond gigabit ethernet via the ip-over-wdm "optical internet" technology that is now being deployed in large wide-area backbone networks. background 1996 -- problems and opportunities switching, vlans, routing, multicast external and kw-area factors strategy on the matter of atm the rfp process funding sources roger watt, ist.