uwng switching, vlans, routing, multicast switching, vlans, routing, multicast 1998-11-16 switching is a layer-two (transmission) function. a switch is a device that interconnects multiple cabling systems into a single transmision system. the device or the cabling-system segment that is connected to a switch port exists in its own independent "collision domain". multiple ports on the switch can be grouped into a "broadcast domain" ... a virtual multi-segment transmission system, referred to as a "virtual local-area network", or vlan. each vlan is completely unware of the existence of any other vlans. routing is a layer-tree (network) function. a router is a device that interconnects multiple networks (or network subnets, in the case of a subnetted netork). a campus network the magnitude of uw's cannot exist as a single unsubnetted network. segmentation into multiple subnets is essential to maintaining the locality-of-reference isolation of traffic between the server and client computing systems within a subnet. in the architecture of the uw campus network, a layer-three ip subnet is implemented as a layer-two vlan. multicast. in ip networking, a special range of ip network numbers permits an ip packet to be addressed so that it will be delivered to multiple destinations. each special address designates an "ip multicast group", and a computing system that wishes to participate in that multicast group uses a special ip protocol (igmp) to transmit that desire to the local ip routing device that services it. all of the ip routing devices between all of the members of a multicast group have to exchange the group-membership information and keep it up to date so that each routing device will know to which of its connected networks a packet for a particular multicast group must be delivered. similarly, a layer-two switch must know how to keep track of which of its ports have devices that are participating in that multicast group (if a switch cannot do that, it must broadcast frames containing such packets to all of its ports, which is not at all desirable). integration. a new breed of core-class device has emerged in the marketplace that contains a layer-two switching processor plus a layer-three routing processor. the full integration of routing and switching into a single device will eventually enable a simpler and more robust topology. eventually, cost-effective choices will emerge that will permit the necessary packet-prioritization and packet-routing and multicast functions to be moved out to the "edge" and performed in workgroup-class devices. maintained by rwwatt@uwaterloo.ca