uw home connectivity uw home connectivity request for information 1998-07-10 objective university of waterloo is seeking to enter into exploratory discussions leading to the formation of long-term relationships with one or more companies that will provide high-speed ip connectivity between the uw campus network and the homes of uw's faculty, staff, and students. overview of current environment the uw campus network contains over 11,000 ip addresses servicing ethernet-connected computers in labs, offices, and on-campus student residences. connectivity between the campus network, the internet, and ca*net-ii is provided under a multi-year contract with the onet networking corporation. uw provides facilities for dial-up ip access from the homes of uw faculty, staff, and students in the kitchener-waterloo area to the campus network via ppp over a pool of 224 analog phone lines equipped with usr 33.6 "sportster" modems connected to several bay "annex remote 4000" terminal server devices in the campus network. the modem-pool phone lines are provided by bell canada under a multi-year centrex/ucd service agreement. uw charges its modem-pool subscribers $0.40 per hour of use in order to recover its costs. uw expects to continue to operate this modem-pool facility as the vehicle for slow-speed low-cost ip access from home for as long as sufficient demand within the uw community exists. however, a modem-pool facility cannot meet the need for high-speed ip access to/from the campus network for the growing number of uw people who wish to be able to use campus-network facilities from home in the same way that they use them on campus. overview of proposed relationship and environment each company with which uw will partner to provide the high-speed ip service is hereafter referred to as a "provider". each member of the uw community who will contract to use the service is hereafter referred to as a "subscriber". uw wishes to out-source the provider responsibility. uw wishes to select the provider(s) and have the service in operation and available to the subscribers not later than 1999-04-30 ... but preferably well before that. uw is willing to consider an exclusive relationship with a chosen provider for some initial "trial" period if conditions for doing so seem significantly favourable to uw and its subscribers. the service to be provided high-speed ip connectivity between the "telecommuting" subscriber and the uw campus network is the focal point of the service being sought. ideally, a range of subscriber transmission-speed offerings is envisioned, from a low of a hundred kilobits per second up to a high of several megabits per second. for some subscribers, the nature of the work will require high speed in both directions. the contractual agreements and financial transactions pertaining to the subscriber's use of the service will be between the subscriber and the provider. the provider will be responsible for all matters pertaining to the subscriber service (installation of provider's equipment to and at the subscriber's home, billing the subscriber for the service, subscriber "helpdesk" trouble reporting and resolution, etc). the cost to the subscriber is expected to be lower than the cost of services sold by the provider that include (for example) customer userids and filespace on the provider's email and web servers, since the uw-community subscribers can use their home computers as clients to computing-system servers at uw for those purposes. subscriber connection the service demarcation point between the subscriber and the provider will be a provider-supplied device located at the subscriber's home. the technology used should be such that the contents of the ip packets between the subscriber and uw are not visible to any other party within the provider's network (except by those of its employees authorized by the provider as and when required to diagnose and correct problems within the provider's network). uw connection the preferred service demarcation point between the provider and uw is a 100mbps ethernet port on one of uw's campus-network backbone switches, with migration to a 1000mbps ethernet port as utilization on the provider/uw link grows. the provider will be responsible for all costs pertaining to bringing its network to this uw demarcation point. (as a short-term initial alternative, uw can consider providing a 155mbps atm port as the demarcation point.) addressing and routing the provider will assign the subscriber an ip address from a provider-obtained ip network number (for many subscribers, a dynamic dhcp-assigned ip address will be acceptable; for some subscribers, a permanent ip address may be required). on the provider/uw link, the provider will deliver to uw only those packets that originate within the provider's ip network and specify a destination within uw's ip network, and uw will deliver to the provider only those packets that originate within uw's ip network and specify a destination within the provider's ip network. number of subscribers it is difficult to estimate the number of subscribers that this high-speed ip service will attract over time, since demand will be a function of cost. however, something on the order of a hundred faculty and staff and several hundred students within the first year of operation is possible. response from prospective providers an initial written response is requested by 1998-08-31 outlining how the provider proposes to address each of the above, including whether uw will need to identify the subscriber to the provider; if so, how; whether the service will also be available to subscribers in non-kw locations; if so, where and how; the various connection speeds for which the subscriber will be able to contract, and what and how the provider proposes to charge the subscriber; the latency and loss values that the provider will guarantee as upper bounds for ip packets between the subscriber and uw through the provider's network to/from the uw demarcation point; the latency and loss values that the subscriber can normally expect to experience for (non-uw) traffic through the provider's network to/from its point(s) of interconnection with the rest of the internet; the date by which the provider will have the service in operation; and items that the provider wishes to discuss in detail with uw. alternative responses uw's preference is to seek an outsourced solution as described above. however, if you cannot respond in the context of a provider but you can respond in the context of a company that is able to supply both the necessary technology and the assistance to help uw to be its own "provider" in some fashion, please do so. uw contact responses, requests for clarification, etc, should be addressed to: roger watt information systems and technology university of waterloo waterloo, ontario, canada n2l 3g1 phone: 519-888-4567, extension 2491 email: rwwatt@ist.uwaterloo.ca evaluation process uw will evaluate each initial written response and will be the sole judge of whether it warrants further pursuit. those selected will each be invited to enter into further discussion with uw. among the issues of major concern to uw in making this selection are: uw's opinion of the reputation of the submittor as a provider of internet-access products and services and its proven commitment to quality customer service and timely technology upgrades; a direct relationship with the provider for a single point of contact for support by uw and by uw's subscribers (ie, no third-party integrators or subcontractors); subscriber prices and contractual terms. at the end of the rfi process, uw may choose to pursue an initial implementation with one or more providers, or to become its own "provider", or to issue a formal rfp for outsourcing the service, or defer a decision until some later date when conditions might seem more favourable. roger watt, ist.