uw network-upgrade status network upgradestatus report 2000-05-12 as reported in the daily bulletin of march 28 (uw welcomes infrastructure funds), uw is in the midst of a multi-year project to upgrade the campus network infrastructure. the upgrades include connections in individual offices, wiring within buildings, and faster transmission equipment everywhere. this is part of a never-ending effort to meet uw's infrastructure needs by pursuing continuing advances in network technology. phase one phase one of the project started in 1997 and took until the end of 1998 to complete. it resulted in 12 core ethernet switches and two routing modules, and an initial 70 workgroup ethernet switches, sufficient to establish "points of presence" in many buildings and upgrade 1800 computer connections. most of those workgroup switches provide each computer with a dedicated 10mbps (ten million bits per second) connection to the switch. a few have dual-mode ability for both 10mbps and 100mbps connections. the "uplink" from the workgroup switch toward the core of the network operates at 100mbps. most of the funding came from a $700k grant from the canada/ontario infrastructure works (coiw) program. phase two phase two of the project started in 1999 and will take until 2002 to complete. it involves installing additional twisted-pair (utp) cabling and ethernet switches to replace old coax cabling and ethernet repeaters that provide about 4000 computer connections in academic areas. most switch connections will be 10/100mbps, with a 100mbps uplink and the ability to upgrade that to 1000mbps (gigabit ethernet) when needed in the future. funding is via grants from the canadian foundation for innovation (cfi), the ontario research and development challenge fund (ordcf), and the ontario innovation trust (oit), plus uw money, totaling $1.7m over the three years. those grants cannot be used for upgrades in areas such as teaching-facility computer workrooms or non-academic buildings such as needles hall. at the same time, additional grants in support of the bell canada university labs project are providing network upgrades for the research groups in the davis centre. future upgrades there are currently more than 11,000 computers in the campus network. teaching-area facilities and the non-academic buildings that are still using coax cabling and/or ethernet repeaters will be upgraded, where needed, as/when funds become available to the university. one of the objectives for the uw campus network is that it be well connected to the external communities of greatest interest to uw. membership in the provincial onet networking corporation is providing that connectivity for uw at the provincial, national, and international levels. the onet network is connected to a number of national networks in canada, each of which also provides international connections to the us and other countries, which in turn have connections to national networks in additional countries. one of the national networks in canada is ca*net3, the "optical ip" multi-gigabit backbone network that interconnects the provincial research/education networks like onet. currently, uw's onet connection is in two distinct parts, a "general internet" connection, and a separate "university communities" connection. the university-communities connection carries all traffic to and from most of the other universities in ontario, and, via ca*net3, the universities in the rest of canada and the many universities in the us and a half-dozen other countries that have "advanced internet" networks like ca*net3. this link will become 1gbps once the ontario's ministry of energy, science, and technology (mest) provincial "optical ip" backbone network (orion) becomes a reality. of course, that does not improve uw's general-internet connectivity. that link is always the most heavily loaded and by far the most expensive of all the links in the campus network. such general-internet connectivity is a commodity that is "volume priced" by the national and international internet service providers. uw benefits from the high-volume discount that onet networking is able to obtain from those isps by aggregating the needs of its members. however, general-internet connectivity does not hold the attention of granting agencies that provide funding to support research and education. so, for the general-internet link, we are exploring various "quality of service" queuing mechanisms in the continuing attempt to ensure that use that is not related to uw's mission does not impact on availability for use that is. to help reduce the load on the general-internet link and at the same time improve connectivity with the kw-area local community, we provide direct connections with interested local isps. it is not yet known what impact the provincial connect ontario program will have on improved network-layer connectivity between uw and the kw-area local community. roger watt, ist.