ctt/bac service agreement ctt/bac service agreement(draft 96may15) ctt/bac joint technical committee there will be a standing body (jtc) of up to three ctt-appointed persons and up to three bac-appointed persons to regularly review the performance of the ctt network within the terms of this service agreement, and to review and recommend on all proposed changes to the ctt network or the terms of this service agreement. under normal circumstances, the jtc will meet not more than once a month and not less than once a quarter. the deliberations of the jtc will be distributed to all subscribers. network description for each subscriber, bac will establish and maintain a ctt network "point of presence" (pop) on the subscriber's premises. each pop will consist of a two-port ip router ("router") with one interface connected to the central ctt network hub ip router and the other interface connected to the subscriber's internal ip network. the ctt network will interconnect the subscriber-internal networks and the external link to the provincial network operated by the onet networking corporation (or the opnet network, if and when that becomes a reality). with the exception of planned outages (see scheduled maintenance), the cct network is to be in operation 24 hours a day, every day. ...---'''---... } onet / ctt \ } ------+{ network } } link \ hub router / } '''---...-+-''' } | } bac premises | } provided, installed, ........................ | ............. } operated, maintained, | } and managed by bac subscriber .----+----. } } premises | router | } pop } '----+----' } } | ==+====+== | | subscriber's internal network the subscriber-side interface to the pop router will be an ieee/802.3 "ethernet" 10base5 aui to which the subscriber will connect its internal network (an alternate interface may provided by bac if mutually agreed to by the subscriber and bac). the interface for the link to the ctt network hub router will be whatever bac requires in order to provide the link capacity for which the subscriber has contracted with bac. bac will also establish a pop, on its premises, via which it will connect its equipment from which it will perform the functions of the network operations centre ("noc"), including the monitoring described in the "network performance" section below. routing information bac will ensure that the appropriate ip routing information is propogated to all pop routers from the ctt network hub router, including the route to every other subscriber network and a "default route" to the external onet (opnet) network. router-imposed security bac will configure each pop router to impose the same basic set of constraints on the ip packets that are to be permitted to and from every subscriber network. such constraints are essential to provide a rudimentary level of security, and will include simple specifications such as: no packet with a source-routing option is to be forwarded; no packet is to be forwarded to the network from the subscriber network unless it has a source ip address inside the ip network number assigned to the subscriber network; no packet is to be forwarded from the network to the subscriber network unless it has a source address outside the subscriber network and a destination address inside the subscriber network; routes learned from the subscriber networks will not be propagated. anything more elaborate than these basic constraints will be the responsibility of the subscriber to provide, outside the terms of this service agreement, using equipment on its internal network. bac will ensure that each pop router will be "read" accessible via snmp from within its subscriber network. scheduled maintenance any scheduable work for which bac requires an outage of any part of the ctt network that will affect all or most subscribers is to be performed between 03:00 and 04:00 and advertised by bac at least 48 hours in advance to a list of email addresses to be provided by ctt. any scheduable work for which bac requires an outage of a particular pop may be scheduled at any time mutually agreeable to bac and the subscriber. the subscriber will not unreasonably withhold its agreement to such requests. network operations centre from its equipment connected to the ctt network via its pop, bac will provide a network operations centre (noc) on a 24x7 basis. the functions and activities of the noc will include the following: conduct the monitoring described in the "network performance" sections below; provide support to the designated operations and technical-support staffs of the subscribers, in the form of liaison regarding the scheduling of installation and maintenance work and a telephone "hot line" for problem reporting and resolution; disseminate via e-mail the "network performance" reports and the logs of the subscriber-initiated and bac-initiated problem reports and their and resolutions. the full reports and logs are to be sent to the jtc; each subscriber is to receive only the sections that pertain to its pop. domain name system each subscriber will provide its own dns primary server. bac will provide secondary dns service for each subscriber network. network number and domain name if requested by the subscriber, bac will assist the subscriber in obtaining a domain name and a world-routable ip network number, by filling out and submitting the necessary applications on behalf of the subscriber. network performance, daily reporting bac will measure and report on the functioning of the ctt network as described in the subsections below. scheduled maintenance time is not to be excluded from these measurements. each daily report will be made available within eight hours of the end of that day, and will be a plain-text file of the form... { yyyymmdd linkspeed availability latency utilization { pop (mbps) (%) (ms) (%) { -------- --------- ------------ ------- ----------- { noc nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { onet nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { subscr a nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { subscr b nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { [...] { subscr z nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { -------- --------- ------------ ------- ----------- { average nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n the numeric values shall be determined as follows. linkspeed. this is the rated capacity of the link between the network and the pop, as reported by the value of the "ifspeed" snmp mib variable, expressed in millions of bits per second. availability. from its equipment connected within its internal network via the noc pop, at five-minute intervals, bac will send ten 1024-byte "ping" packets to each pop router, including the noc pop. the "ping" packets to a pop will be spaced one second apart. for each pop, the daily "availability" percent is calculated as... { # of "ping" responses received within one second that day { 100 * --------------------------------------------------------- { # of "ping" packets sent that day a pop will be declared to be in a down state if no response to any of the "ping" packets has been received within one second after the "ping" is sent, whereupon bac will immediately initiate a problem investigation. latency. for each of the five-minute intervals in availability above, calculate the average round-trip time in milliseconds for those "ping" packets for which a response was received within one second, and divide by two to obtain the one-way average. for each pop, the daily "latency" value is the average of these one-way averages for the day. utilization. for each pop, at thirty-minute intervals, bac will collect the values of the two snmp mib counter variables "ifinoctets" and "ifoutoctets" for the router's network interface. any interval in which either counter has overflowed will be discarded. the counters and interval-width times for the remaining intervals for that router for that day will be summed and used to calculate a megabytes-per-second average for each of the two counters. the "utilization" percent is determined by expressing the larger of the two averages (assuming that the link is bi-directional) as a percent of the linkspeed. network performance, monthly reporting each monthly report will show the monthly average for the corresponding daily value, and will be made available within three working days after the last day of that month. also, for each pop, the following item will be added to the monthly report. mttrepair. this is the average time, measured in hours from the time a pop has been declared down, for the pop to be restored to the up state. network performance, monthly objectives latency. for each pop, bac will initially propose an expected "latency" value. bac will be considered by ctt to have met its latency objective that month if the reported monthly "latency" value for each pop is less than its expected "latency" value, provided that the corresponding "utilization" value is less than 50%. (it is not appropriate to hold bac responsible for a higher-than-expected latency that is the result of congestion, a situation that is beyond bac's control.) mttrepair. bac will be considered by ctt to have met its mttrepair objective that month if the monthly mttrepair value is less than two hours. bac will warrant to ctt that bac will at all times maintain sufficient capacity in all components of the network such that it will meet the above objectives every month. additional reporting ctt will require the best-available management information as on-going input to its review and decision-making processes regarding the network and its evolution. bac is expected to use the network performance measurements as the basis for making timely recommendations to ctt on the need to upgrade the appropriate components of the network. from time to time, ctt will also require that bac provide additional insight on these matters, in forms such as making presentations elaborating on the state of the network at meetings of ctt's subscriber representatives at agreed-to times, or by making agreed-to alterations in the performance monitoring and reporting described above.