uwng rfp process uwng rfp process 1997-08-17 an rfp was sent 1997-06-06 by purchasing to seven major internet-technologies vendors and to the online-notice ontario/quebec procurement system. in summary, the rfp stated: university of waterloo is seeking to form a long-term strategic relationship with a major vendor of switching, routing, and network-server products for the establishment and evolution of its "next-generation internet" campus network to interoperate with the onet "uni*net" and canarie "ca*net-ii" regional and national networks. the technologies to enable this next-generation campus network will centre around the integration of fast ethernet and gigabit ethernet switching with ip routing and ip multicast and ip bandwidth reservation and quality-of-service, and will extend to include servers for related network services such as address-assignment control, network-access device and user authentication, internet and intranet firewalls, secure web-based commerce, computer-telephony integration, and desktop/classroom videoconferencing and distance education. submissions were received from three vendors and a reseller/integrator. the submissions were reviewed by ist and cnag. the reseller/integrator was eliminated immediately because it was not a vendor, and therefore not an entity with which we could form a strategic vendor relationship. the three vendors were invited to give technical presentations to ist and cnag. vendor a presented excellent transmission-layer products with an impressive ethernet switching-architecture technology. unfortunately, its architechure was layer-two only, with no support for network-layer routing. with no network-layer architecture or products and no network-servers products, vendor a did not meet the full range of requirements of the rfp. vendor b strongly and repeatedly emphasized its focus on the atm transmission-systems world. it stated that it did not intend to pursue the integration of ip routing and ethernet switching and that it did not intend to place substantial emphasis on gigabit ethernet. vendor b did not meet the full range of requirements of the rfp. cisco was the only respondent with products and plans and marketplace presence that met the full range of requirements of the rfp. the rfp was awarded to cisco. in his 1997-08-06 announcement to ucist and cnag, jay black (associate provost, ist) stated: the following factors influenced my decision. first, i believe that a strategic alliance with a single vendor indeed has some value to uw at this time; accepting the [vendor b] proposal would have implied dealing with one or more other vendors. second, although we may well require atm-based communication in the future, i do not believe that is the case today; we can migrate towards that goal if and as it becomes more compelling. third, i don't believe that ist has enough spare capacity to do anything that isn't necessary today. maintained by rwwatt@uwaterloo.ca