uw campus network description campus network description 2002-01-19 this document describes the composition of the campus network and its underlying transmission systems. assigned internet names and numbers terminology locality-of-reference network architecture transmission and network layers client-server workgroup computing systems assigned internet names and numbers network number: 129.97.0.0 subnet mask: 255.255.255.0 domain: uwaterloo.ca autonomous system number: 12093 snmp private-enterprise number: 1.3.6.1.4.1.198 terminology an internet is the general term for any interconnection of multiple ip networks. uw's network is an internet. each of uw's interconnected transmission systems constitutes one subnet of uw's ip network (129.97). the interconnection of these subnets forms the internet that is internal to uw. an intranet is an internet that is internal to a single organization. therefore uw's internet is an intranet. an extranet is an internet that interconnects the intranets of a specific set of organizations. an organization's network can be part of more than one extranet. uw's network is part of an extranet formed by the organizations that are members of the onet networking corporation. the internet is the global interconnection of all of the intranets and extranets that exist at municipal, regional, provincial, national, and international levels throughout the world. locality-of-reference network architecture the corridor wiring-closet workgroup ethernet switch and the computers connected to it form "the local workgroup" for an organizational unit. in a perfectly-architected computing environment, this local workgroup will contain all of the organizational unit's server machines and all of its client machines that depend on those servers. this is the "locality of reference" principle. some client/server configurations are capable of excessive volumes of traffic. common examples are a collection of diskless workstations and their filesystem server(s), or a collection of x stations and the computing system(s) on which their processing occurs. traffic-intense client/server configurations should be connected to the same workgroup switch, so that the traffic between them remains local to the switch. level-one network the level-one (campus backbone) network contains those things that are essential as institution-wide network resources, such as the switches/routers that connect to the level-two networks, the device that connects to the onet network and the rest of the worldwide internet, the computing systems that are dedicated as the primary servers for (for example) the domain name system, campus authentication, the uwdir corporate directory, the primary news server (news.uwaterloo.ca), and the terminal servers that enable access from off campus via the dial-up modem pool. level-two networks to achieve locality of reference and survivability so that the level-two network and any lower-level networks that it contains can survive as a functioning standalone network during an outage of the level-one routing device by which it is connected, each level-two network should have within it those servers that are essential to the operation of the other computing systems within that level-two network and any connected lower-level networks. network services that should be provided within the level-two network include a caching domain name system server, file-system servers and backup, servers for x stations and personal computers, mail server for client computers running user-agent mailing software, mx handling for computers that are not operated on a continuous basis, and other functions as deemed appropriate by ist and the administrative entity responsible for the organizational unit(s) serviced by the level-two network. lower-level networks in the evolution of the campus network, the objective is to minimize the number of lower-level networks. requests for the creation of such networks will not normally be accepted unless there are special-technology conditions that cannot otherwise be accomodated. transmission-layer switching and network-layer routing applications computing systems network transmission systems a transmission system is a physical construct. it is the bottom layer of the adjacent simplified four-layer model. it comprises both the local cabling-system medium to which nearby devices are connected and a protocol for transmiting data between those devices via that medium. communication outside the local transmission system to which a device is connected requires the use of a network-layer protocol. a network is a virtual construct. it consists of an addressing scheme that is independent of the multiple local transmission systems across which it operates, and a protocol that is used to transmit packets of information between devices in different transmission systems via their network-layer addresses rather than their transmission-layer addresses. the transmission-systems layer applications computing systems network transmission systems uw's data-transmission protocol is ethernet ... at 10mbps in most places, at 100mbps (fast ethernet) where needed today, at 1000mbps (gigabit ethernet) where needed in a few years, and at 10gbps (fast gigabit ethernet, or "10gbe") when the need grows beyond that. uw's two cabling-system media are fibre (for the backbone and its links into buildings) and unshielded twisted-pair (category-5/5e utp) copper wire (for the links to workstations and servers), interconnected by multi-port repeaters (obsolete, transmit everything to every port) or switches (current, transmit only to the specific port at which the destination device is connected). there are a few other cabling-system and interconnection-device technologies in various corners of the network; a few exist for the purpose of conducting research into those technologies, but most exist only for historical reasons (they made sense at the time, and the funds and/or the need to replace them do not yet exist). the backbone fibre topology consists of eleven multi-pair fibre bundles linking nine backbone wiring centres. the first two bundles (mc-bmh and bmh-gsc) were installed in the early 1990s with multiple pairs of multi-mode fibres and no single-mode fibres because of some specific deadline constraints. all core bundles installed since then have both multi-mode and single-mode pairs. the single-mode fibre is being held in reserve for some future very-high-speed transmission system (may be required for gigabit or 10gb ethernet over the longer links). the backbone switching topology is a core of ten enterprise-class ethernet switches from the cisco catalyst 5500 family. the workgroup-class switches are from the cisco catalyst 1900, 2900, and 3500 families. the primary workgroup switch now being acquired is the c3548, which provides 48 10/100mbps utp ports and a slot for a gbps fibre module. the c1900s are the lowest-cost switches; they have 24 10mbps utp ports, 1 10mbps aui port, and 2 100mbps (fast ethernet) ports (2 utp, or one utp and one fibre). the network layer applications computing systems network transmission systems uw's network protocol is ip (the "internet protocol"). a device knows how to map ip network-layer virtual addresses into ethernet tranmission-layer physical addresses only for the transmision system to which the device is itself connected; there is no knowledge of physical addresses outside the local transmission system. therefore, the different transmission-system segments of the network are interconnected by "routing" devices that determine the transmission system into which to send a packet based on the ip address of the destination. each device on a transmission system must know the physical address of the device that performs the ip routing that provides the paths to devices outside the local transmission system.> in uw's multi-level ip subnet topology, each level-two network is a subnet whose routing function is provided by a routing module in one of the backbone ethernet switches. some second-level subnets also contain lower-level subnets whose routing function is provided by a dual-connected computing system in the level-two subnet, usually because the lower-level subnet is still using an obsolete "unswitched" transmission system. that practice is expected to gradually cease over time as the organizational units responsible for those lower-level subnets encounter the need to upgrade. integrated ethernet switching and ip routing the two primary core nodes are cisco catalyst 5500 devices. each includes ethernet switching and a route-processor module. the two route-processor modules can interoperate to provide load-balanced routing and an automatic backup in case of an outage of one of them. each of the links between the two c5500s is 100mbps full-duplex (100mbps in each direction); they operate concurrently and do load balancing (a feature that most ethernet switches allow as long as the multiple links are between the same two switches). the other core nodes are cisco catalyst 5505s or 5509s that include ethernet switching and a form of ip-routing integration ... by watching for between-subnet traffic that is sent out a port to one of the two route-processor c5500 devices and comes back on that same port destined for a port in a different subnet, the switching engine learns how to switch subsequent local traffic between those two subnets locally. each of the links from these switches to the two c5500s is 100mbps full-duplex. client-server workgroups some "client-server workgroup" network-distributed computing systems use non-ip protocols for the provision of services between the server and its clients. historically, these have been special-purpose protocols for user-authentication or print-server or file-server facilities. uw's stategic direction for campus-network integration is to pursue the provision of such services within the framework of the ip-standards environment. uw's waterloo polaris is completing its transition to a fully-ip network layer from its origins as the "watstar" network-distributed computing system. microsoft's windows operating systems use some non-ip protocols in its "network neighbourhood", but these are not passed between the different ip subnets of the campus network. apple's appletalk is not ip, but the routing devices in the level-one network are also capable of routing the "appletalk phase ii" protocol. however, there is no long-term commitment to continue to route appletalk as an enterprise-wide network protocol. novell's netware protocols are not supported. roger watt, ist.