uw external connectivity uw external connectivity 2002-01-25 current connections future connections current connections the onet network ... province, to country and world one of the objectives for the uw campus network is that it be well connected to the external communities that are of greatest interest to uw. membership in the provincial onet networking corporation is providing that connectivity for uw at the provincial, national, and international levels. the onet network is connected to a number of national networks in canada, each of also which provides international connections to the us and other countries, which in turn have connections to national networks in additional countries. for general-internet traffic, the onet network has multi-homed connections in toronto and ottawa to several internet service providers (isps) with national and international connectivity. for university-communities traffic, the onet network includes connections in toronto and ottawa to canarie's ca*net3 "optical ip" national advanced-internet backbone, which connects the onet-like provincial networks and has connections to advanced-internet networks like ca*net3 in other countries. the university-communities connection carries all traffic to and from most of the other universities and colleges in ontario, and, via ca*net3, the universities in the rest of canada and the many universities in the us and in other countries that have "advanced internet" networks like ca*net3. the general-internet connection carries everything else (see external-volume statistics). local isps ... city, region there is currently no local-community "point of presence" for the direct interconnection of the networks operated by the various isps that provide connectivity for the community's residents, businesses, and public-sector entities. until then, the uw campus network is providing temporary local-community connectivity with interested local isps. future connections orion ... province, to country and world within ontario, the initiative is underway to create a multi-gigabit "optical ip" provincial backbone network that will interconnect the province's universities, colleges, schools, research, and related organizations in each of 21 areas, with a link from orion to ca*net3. 2000-02 ... the ministry of energy, science, and technology (mest) issued an rfp. a response was submitted by "the orano group" (the onet networking corporation and four municipal/regional network organizations, with onet networking as the lead partner). 2000-05 ... mest announced "funding of up to $57m" for the ontario research and innovation optical network, with the orano group as its partner for phase-one deployment, with network operations to be managed by onet networking for the first two years. 2000-10 ... unfortunately, mest had allocated only $3.5m to phase one, which was not nearly enough, so a refined proposal was submitted by the orano group. 2001-12 ... mest announced that it had created a non-profit "orano" corporation to receive and manage the mest funds and govern all matters pertaining to the orion network. the orano corporation issued a "statement of work guide" on 2001-12-20 describing the two-part process by which the orion-eligible institutions in each of the 21 areas were to propose the location of their area's orion point-of-presence (pop) by 2002-01-18 and their expected costs in connecting to that orion pop by 2002-03-15. 2002-?? ... orion will provide uw with a 1gbps ethernet interface for "university communities" connectivity. a waterloo-area network exchange point ... city, region from time to time there has been a lot of apparent interest in creating an open-to-all ip "backbone" network to interconnect the internal networks of the private- and public-sector organizations and the residential-service isps in the area. here's a summary of what has, so far, failed to materialize in the region. 1994-06 ... discussions began for the creation of a municipal network to interconnect the internal networks of both private- and public-sector organizations in the kw/cambridge/guelph area (designated by the ontario government as "canada's technology triangle"). in august of 1995, a request for information document was issued to potential suppliers/operators. at that time, the number of potential participant organizations was about fifty. by december of 1995, as a consequence of pricing estimates in responses received to the rfi, only thirteen of those were willing to commit to a phase-one implementation. in may of 1996, final negotiations were underway with bell advanced communications to prepare a letter of intent and a service agreement for an initial network configuration to be in operation before september 1996. in the summer of 1996, one of the larger participants withdrew and the remaining participants could not afford to proceed, and the project fell into a state of limbo and disinterest. 1997-10 ... interest in a municipal-area network was renewed by the communitech association, the city of waterloo, and the region of waterloo, with a focus on obtaining local and federal funding to help meet the needs of the municipal government, public-sector agencies, and high-tech companies in the area. some of this renewed interest focused on using part of a proposed business-park development on uw's north-campus land to create world-class networked facilities for the area's high-tech companies, but there was not sufficient commitment to proceed. 1999-02 ... the introduction of the federal government's smart communities program created renewed hope for a municipal network when this area's submission became one of five on the shortlist from which ontario's "demonstration project" would be selected. but in 2000-05 that honour went to the ottawa "smart capital" project. 2000-03 ... the government of ontario introduced its counterpart connect ontario program to help fund up to 50 ontario "smart" communities. as of 2001-07, three ontario communities have been awarded funds to help with the implementation of their proposed projects and another sixteen communities have been awarded funds to help develop the business plans for their submissions. other wrepnet the waterloo region education and public network is a private regional network servicing the multiple locations of the waterloo catholic district school board, the waterloo region district school board, the region of waterloo, the city of waterloo, the city of kitchener, the city of cambridge, the waterloo public library, the kitchener public library, the cambridge public library, and conestoga college. planning began in 1998 when the two district school boards applied for $10m from ontario's ministry of education and training to create a regional network to connect their respective locations throughout waterloo, kitchener, cambridge, and the surrounding areas. according to statements made at its 2001-06-01 "public launch" ceremony at kitchener city hall, wrepnet uses 550km of fibre leased from fibretech and 3com switching/routing devices to interconnect the internal networks at each of 217 locations, encompassing more than 14,000 computers. uw is not a participant in wrepnet, although that certainly would be an option to evaluate if uw had multiple campuses in the region. roger watt, ist.