high-speed home ip connectivity high-speed home ip connectivity uw has a "preferred supplier" marketing agreement with bell, for three years commencing 1999-09, for the provision of high-speed ip connecivity from the kw-area homes of uw students, faculty, and staff, using bell's sympatico "high speed edition" (hse) service. this document summarizes the requirements uw issued in its 1998-07 request for information to potential providers, and identifies the areas where the hse service currently differs from those requirements. 1999-12-02 the service to be provided high-speed ip connectivity between the "telecommuting" subscriber and the uw campus network is the focal point of the service being sought. ideally, a range of subscriber transmission-speed offerings is envisioned, from a low of a hundred kilobits per second up to a high of several megabits per second. for some subscribers, the nature of the work will require high speed in both directions. hse currently provides a maximum upload speed of 120kbps and a maximum download speed of 960kbps. the service area enabled by the "digital subscriber line" modem is a maximum of 4.5km between the home and the bell "central office" (co) to which the home's copper-wire telephone line is connected. line quality and distance between the home and the co may result in less than the maximum speeds. initially, the hse service will be available within the service areas of the following cos in the region ... the albert street co (waterloo), the water street co (kitchener), the kingsway co (south kitchener), and the galt co (cambridge). the contractual agreements and financial transactions pertaining to the subscriber's use of the service will be between the subscriber and the provider. the provider will be responsible for all matters pertaining to the subscriber service (installation of provider's equipment to and at the subscriber's home, billing the subscriber for the service, subscriber "helpdesk" trouble reporting and resolution, etc). the equipment can be installed by the subscriber. the cost to the subscriber is expected to be lower than the cost of services sold by the provider that include (for example) customer userids and filespace on the provider's email and web servers, since the uw-community subscribers can use their home computers as clients to computing-system servers at uw for those purposes. bell did not offer a reduced-price-for-reduced-features subset of its hse service. however, bell has offered a 10% discount to members of uw provided that the uw person is a customer of bell's long-distance services. subscriber connection the service demarcation point between the subscriber and the provider will be a provider-supplied device located at the subscriber's home. the technology used should be such that the contents of the ip packets between the subscriber and uw are not visible to any other party within the provider's network (except by those of its employees authorized by the provider as and when required to diagnose and correct problems within the provider's network). uw connection as the service demarcation point between the provider and uw, uw will provide a 10mbps or 100mbps port on one of uw's campus-network backbone switches, with migration to a 1000mbps ethernet port as utilization on the provider/uw link grows. the provider will be responsible for all costs pertaining to bringing its network to this uw demarcation point. bell's sympatico facilities are connected to its nexxia national internet service (nis). uw's campus network is connected to the provincial onet network, which has a direct high-speed connection to bell's nis. speed, latency, and reliability in the connection between uw at-home hse subscribers and the uw campus network are therefore expected to be excellent without requiring any special hse/uw direct local interconnect. however, uw will pursue such a connection in the future should conditions and costs warrant doing so. addressing and routing the provider will assign the subscriber an ip address from a provider-obtained ip network number (for many subscribers, a dynamic dhcp-assigned ip address will be acceptable; for some subscribers, a permanent ip address may be required). static ip addresses are not available. on the provider/uw link, the provider will deliver to uw only those packets that originate within the provider's ip network and specify a destination within uw's ip network, and uw will deliver to the provider only those packets that originate within uw's ip network and specify a destination within the provider's ip network. not relevant (see "uw connection" above). roger watt, ist. any errors in statements above are my fault, not bell's.