uw campus network firewalls and security practices network firewalls and uw security practices 2002-01-03 terminology common firewalls router-firewall security practices protection from unauthenticated-user devices further work required terminology .---------. .----------. .-----------.&nbsp | harmful | | firewall | | protected |&nbsp '----+----' '--+----+--' '-----+-----'&nbsp | | | | &nbsp '------------' '-------------' &nbsp a firewall is the generic term for any kind of barrier that prevents the spread of something harmful. understanding any particular firewall requires understanding what the harmful thing is and how the firewall prevents it from spreading. see campus network description and campus network management for background information. common firewalls simple firewalls exist both at the transmission-system layer and the network layer. at the transmission-system layer the ethernet interface in a computer is a firewall, under normal operation. the harmful thing is the volume of frames on the cabling-system segment to which it is connected. under normal operation, the interface ignores all frames except those that are addressed to its computer and those that are "multicast" frames (which, by definition, must be examined by all devices connected to a transmission system). this is not a problem in an ethernet-switch transmission system, but it is a serious concern in a shared-medium transmission system. a person who has control of the machine's operating system can instruct its ethernet interface to pass all frames that transit the cabling-system segment to the computer for processing. this is the essence of a "frame analyzer" (sometimes referred to as a "packet sniffer" or "packet snooper"). in the hands of an authorized technical-support person trusted to perform problem-diagnosis tasks, it is an essential tool. in the hands of anyone else, it is a harmful thing. a repeater is not a firewall. the purpose of a repeater is to take the transmission-system "frame" that it has received from one of its ports and repeat that frame to all of its other ports. in the 1980s, we used repeaters to joint two thick-wire coax cable segments, or to joint one thick-wire and multiple thin-wire coax segments. in the early 1990s, we used multiport repeaters (hubs) to join multiple "unshielded twisted pair" (utp) cabling-system segments. in the latter half of the 1990s, ethernet switches made repeaters obsolete. a multi-port repeater with eavesdrop protection is a firewall. the harmful thing is the information in the data portion of the frame (the part of the frame that contains the network-layer packet). a repeater with "eavesdrop protection" sends the frame intact out the port that leads to the destination device, but prevents that information from spreading to other devices by putting garbage in the data portion of the frame before sending it out the other ports (unless, of course, it is a multicast frame, which must be repeated intact). a bridge is a firewall. it interconnects two or more cabling-system segments. the harmful thing is the volume of frames on each of these cabling-system segments. the bridge prevents unneeded frames from spreading from one segment to the other segment(s) by ignoring any frame that is destined for a device that is on the port on which the frame was received. otherwise, the frame is transmitted out the port that leads to the destination device. however, multicast frames must be transmitted out all other ports. a switch is a firewall. it is a high-performance multiport bridge, usually with processing capacity sufficient to move frames between its "n/2" different pairs of ports at the sum of the physical-layer speeds of the media connected to those pairs. some switches only permit a single device to be connected to a port. others permit either a single device or a cabling-system segment to be connected to a port. in either case, the frame is only sent out the port that leads to the destination device (unless it is a multicast frame, which must be transmitted to all ports other than the one from which it was received, or it is a frame destined for an address not known to the switch, in which case the switch "floods" the frame to all other ports). at the network layer a device that forwards packets based on ip addresses rather than transmission-system addresses is referred to herein as a "router". a router is a firewall. it interconnects two or more otherwise-unconnected transmission systems. each independent transmission system forms a "network" that has its own unique network number. the harmful thing is the volume of frames on the transmission system. the router prevents unneeded frames from spreading outside their own transmission system by accepting only those frames that are addressed to that router port (thus it ignores all transmission-layer multicast frames as well). the data portion of a frame is the network-layer "packet". the router extracts the packet's network-layer destination address, consults its routing table, and gives the packet to the port out which lies the network containing that destination address; that port puts the packet into the data portion of a frame and transmits it onto the transmission system. (if the destination is to a network-layer multicast address, then the packet has to be copied to its other ports that the router knows lead to addresses that wish to receive that multicast traffic; how the router learns about those ports is beyond the intended scope of this document.) a router with access-control rules is a firewall. the harmful thing is some of the sources, destinations, and/or types of packets that would otherwise pass through the router. the router prevents their spread by examining each packet received, and testing the various fields in that packet against a set of organization-determined rules to decide whether to drop (reject, filter) it or forward (accept, route) that packet. uw router-firewall security practices implementing effective network security practices requires placing carefully-chosen constraints on the nature of the traffic that is considered "safe" to allow into, out of, and through the network. in its simplest form, this requires proper setting of vendor-provided configuration options and the use of access-control rules in all of the campus-backbone routers that interconnect the external network(s) and the subnets of the internal network. ideally, those rules should be of the form "permit things that are safe; deny all else". external (between uw and the rest of the world) ist configures options and access-control lists (rules) in uw's external router to control the packets that enter and leave the campus network via its external connections. the options and rules reject traffic types that are known to be significant security liabilities that can be exploited by external "hackers" attempting to penetrate computers within the campus network, and activities that impede mission-relevant traffic by consuming significant shared-resource bandwidth (including denial-of-service attacks). the list of traffic types to be rejected is determined in consultation with cnag and csag. for each ip packet, each rule is tested in succession until a match occurs. the following is an overview of the rules that are currently in place. deny incoming packets that have a uw subnet-broadcast destination address deny incoming packets that have a multicast, loopback, or rfc1918 (private network) source address permit incoming packets for established tcp sessions permit incoming packets with multicast destination addresses permit incoming bgp routing updates from authorized sources permit incoming snmp and icmp packets from authorized sources deny incoming icmp "echo request" packets (this rejects incoming ping and traceroute requests) and snmp packets, deny outgoing icmp "echo reply" packets deny any packet that is an icmp redirect or unreachable, a udp echo, or any of chargen, link, lpd, netbus client/server, nfs, rpc, tftp, or uucp deny incoming dns zone-transfer requests unless destination is one of uw's internal primaries and source is one of uw's external secondaries deny incoming packets that claim to have uw source addresses deny outgoing packets that claim to have non-uw source addresses deny packets that are any of the protocols known to be used by music/video file-sharing software (such as gnutella, kazaa, morpheus, etc) permit everything else the list is reviewed on a regular basis. eventually, for at least some part of the campus network, it will be converted to a "permit only the small set of assumed-to-be-safe things that are required in support of uw's mission, deny all else" form, which would prevent every new not-yet-understood thing from hurting that part of the uw environment. internal (between subnets) the above "external firewalling" does nothing to curtail internal penetration attempts or shared-resource abuse between machines in the different subnets of the campus network. ist configures the "core" routers that interconnect the second-level subnets to activate all available intrusion-rejection features that do not seriously impede the performance of the routers. further work is required in this area. for example, for some on-campus subnets, we don't need to allow traffic to machines in those subnets to be initiated from outside those subnets. internal (between machines in the same subnet) ensuring that all machines in a subnet are wired to switches instead of shared-access transmission systems (repeaters) prevents one machine from passively spying on the traffic of the other machines, but it does not prevent one machine from trying to penetrate or masquerade as another machine in that same subnet. switches keep getting more sophisticated. hopefully one day the transmission systems throughout the campus network will contain only switches that demand user authentication each time a computer is plugged in or powered on, and then assign that computer an ip address to use for the duration and prevent it from using any other ip address. but that technology isn't routinely available, yet. protecting the sensitive devices in the campus network in the simplest case, this requires internal routers with an access-control mechanism that permits any communication to be initiated from any of the sensitive devices in a subnet out into the campus network and beyond, but denies any attempt to initiate any communication to the sensitive devices from the campus network or beyond. more complex cases require special access-control measures whose treatment is beyond the intended scope of this document. such measures are under on-going investigation, and include permitting access to certain subnets and devices only by specifically-authenticated people. protecting the campus (and beyond) from unauthenticated-user devices there is a growing desire to provide wireless and wired network ports for "information search and retrieval" workstations and portable devices (such as laptop computers and personal digital assistants) in all areas of the campus. from the perspective of security, the provision of such connections must be regarded as harmful in the extreme. harmful devices protected devices&nbsp .-. .-. .-. .-. .----------. .-. .-. .-. .-. &nbsp |h| |h| |h| |h| | firewall | |p| |p| |p| |p| &nbsp '+' '+' '+' '+' '--+----+--' '+' '+' '+' '+' &nbsp | | | | | | | | | | &nbsp .--+---+---+---+--. | | .--+---+---+---+--.&nbsp | untrusted world |-----' '-----| trusted world |&nbsp '-----------------' '-----------------'&nbsp since 1991, the university has imposed administrative regulations on the nature of the devices that can be connected to any portion of the campus network (see network management practices for details). devices that do not authenticate their users and are used by multiple people are harmful. for example, they constitute a launching pad from which someone can anonymously communicate with malicious intent or from which a "hacker" can anonymously attempt to penetrate any computer in the campus network and beyond. therefore, such devices must be isolated from the campus network and the world by connecting the harmful devices in a private network behind a firewall server that performs user authentication and maintains an audit-trail log, in some fashion. a login/proxy server. the devices have no access to the campus network and beyond. each user of each device must communicate with "proxy" processes running on the server, or must telnet or rlogin to the server and complete a userid/password login and then use the server as the source from which to communicate. as far as the campus network and the rest of the internet are concerned, the devices do not exist. an authentication/address server. the server allows traffic to/from each device to pass through only after the user of the device has completed a userid/password login and been assigned an ip address. there must be some counterpart process by which the server detects that the user's "session" has ended, disallows further traffic to/from that device, and reclaims the ip address for reassignment. ist has developed a network-port authentication system for use in providing network-switch ports for laptop computers, until such time as such systems become commercially available, and investigation is underway to provide a comparable user-authentication mechanism for wireless access. engineering computing has developed a more general network authentication appliance that should be sufficient in a variety of lower-volume situations. by connecting the devices behind a router with an access-control list that severely constrains the permitted communications to a deemed-to-be-safe subset of specific application protocols and specific network destinations. this is the only solution if it is impossible to authenticate the users of the harmful devices. further work required securing uw's computing and network resources is an on-going task. ist tracks evolving network and computing-system security technologies (network-port user authentication, virus and intrusion detection, firewalls, etc) and deploys them within the campus as dictated by uw priorities and funding. roger watt, ist.