ctt-2000 consortium rfi 95sep25 request for information, ctt-2000 consortium, revised 95sep25 the ctt-2000 consortium ("ctt") represents a number of organizations ("subscriber") in canada's technology triangle (the area encompassed by cambridge, guelph, and kitchener-waterloo) that wish to have the use of a local internet-connected network ("network") for ip connectivity between themselves and the constituencies they serve, and with all other internet-connected entities in the local, regional, provincial, national, and international communities. ctt wishes to enter into a multi-year service agreement ("agreement") for the provision and operation of this local network. this rfi has been produced by a ctt subcommittee struck for the purpose of obtaining initial proposals from organizations that the subcommittee expects have the ability to be the provider/operator ("operator") of the network. the rfi is not complete; the subcommittee is making the current draft available as an aid to further discussion, and such discussion may lead to revision of the rfi. the rfi is not confidential; however, the content of any response will be regarded as confidential information that is not to be distributed beyond the steering committee. ctt would like to have the beginnings of its network in operation in the fall of 1995. therefore, the subcommittee would very much like to receive a response from you before september 1. your submission may consist of one or two parts. part "a" is your initial proposal to provide the environment described in the rfi, and must be included. if you have an alternate proposal that you believe will better serve ctt's needs, you may submit that as part "b". network description conceptually, each network point of presence ("pop") will consist of a two-port ip router ("router") with one interface connected to the network and the other interface connected to a subscriber network or an external network. the network will interconnect the subscriber-network pops and the external-network pops. with the exception of planned outages (see scheduled maintenance), the network is to be in operation 24 hours a day, every day. .....-----'''''-----..... } / \ } { network } } \ / } '''''-----.....--+--''''' } | } provided, installed, | } operated, managed by | } the operator | } .----+----. } } | router | } pop } '----+----' } } | ==+====+== | | subscriber's internal network, or | some external network no connections to the network are to occur except by instruction from ctt to the operator. for each subscriber, the operator will establish a pop on the subscriber's premises. the router will provide an ieee/802.3 aui interface to which the subscriber will connect its internal network. power to the pop equipment will be through an "uninteruptable power supply (ups)" device (specifications of the ups are to be proposed in the submission). one or more additional such pops will exist to provide the external connection(s) of the network to the rest of the worldwide internet (premises and external provider are to be proposed in the submission). a range of connection-speed offerings is required to meet the current and evolving needs of ctt and its subscribers. the topology and equipment to be used in creating and managing the network and the pops is to be proposed by the operator. ctt itself will require one such subscriber pop, at a speed necessary to sustain the traffic to it. there is to be no cost attached to this subscriber pop, and the speed is to be automatically upgraded by the operator whenever necessary to keep pace with the traffic. the operator will also establish a pop, on its premises, via which it will connect its equipment from which it will perform the functions of the network operations centre ("noc"), including the monitoring described in the "network performance" section below. modem pool the operator will provide, at its pop, a contention-based dialup facility consisting of phone lines connected to a pool of v.34/v.42bis modems connected to ports on a communications server that provides terminal-to-host connectivity via telnet (essential) and rlogin (optional), and dynamic-address ip connectivity via ppp (essential) and slip (optional). use of the facility is to require that each user be registered and have a userid/password. users are to be able to connect to subscriber pops within the network, but not to the external-network pop(s). the operator will handle the registration of users and the assignment of userids and initial passwords, will bill the users for their use of the facility at a "dollars per hour used" rate (to be proposed by the operator), and will maintain records of use sufficient to associate each use of the facility with the user. such records are to be kept for the most recent three months, and the operator will use these records to assist in investigations of penetration attempts made from the facility. routing information the operator will ensure that full ip routing information is propagated between all pops ... the route to each subscriber network, plus a default route to the appropriate external network (to be proposed by operator). router-imposed security ctt will specify a set of basic constraints on the ip packets that are to be permitted to and from the subscriber networks, and the operator will ensure that that set of constraints is appropriately configured for each pop. such constraints are intended to provide a rudimentary level of security, and will include simple specifications such as: no packet with a source-routing option is to be forwarded; no packet is to be forwarded to the network from the subscriber network unless it has a source ip address inside the ip network number assigned to the subscriber network; no packet is to be forwarded from the network to the subscriber network unless it has a source address outside the subscriber network and a destination address inside the subscriber network; routes learned from the subscriber networks will not be propagated. anything more elaborate than the basic constraints will be the responsibility of the subscriber to provide for itself, using its equipment on its internal network. the operator will ensure that all routers will be accessible via snmp from the subscriber network at the ctt-located pop, and that the router that services a subscriber pop will be accessible via snmp from within that subscriber network. scheduled maintenance any scheduable work for which the operator requires an outage of any part of the network is to be performed between 03:00 and 04:00 and advertised by the operator at least 48 hours in advance to a list of email addresses to be provided by ctt. any outage of a greater duration must be requested by the operator more than 7 days in advance and agreed to by ctt; ctt will not unreasonably withhold its agreement to such requests. any scheduable work for which the subscriber requires an outage of the pop on its premises may be scheduled at the subscriber's discretion. the subscriber will advertise that outage at least 48 hours in advance to the email list mentioned above. network operations centre from its equipment connected to the network via its pop, the operator will provide a network operations centre on a 24x7 basis. the functions and activities of the noc will include the following: conduct the monitoring described in the "network performance" sections below; provide support to the designated operations and technical-support staffs of the subscribers, in the form of liaison regarding the scheduling of installation and maintenance work and a telephone "hot line" for problem reporting and resolution; disseminate via e-mail the daily and monthly "network performance" reports and the the logs of the subscriber-initiated and operator-initiated problem reports and their and resolutions; the full reports and logs are to be sent to the ctt technical committee; each subscriber is to receive only the sections that pertain to its pop. domain name system each subscriber will provide its own dns primary server. the operator will use facilities connected via its pop to provide secondary dns service for each subscriber network. network number and domain name if requested by the subscriber, the operator will assist the subscriber in obtaining its own network number from the canadian ip registrar and its own domain name from the ca domain registrar, by filling out and submitting the necessary applications on behalf of the subscriber. the network number and domain name obtained in this fashion will be registered as belonging to the subscriber, not to the operator. network performance, daily reporting the operator will measure and report on the functioning of the network as described in the subsections below. scheduled maintenance time is to be excluded from these measurements. each daily report will be made available within eight hours of the end of that day, and will be a plain-text file of the form... { yyyymmdd linkspeed availability latency utilization { pop (mbps) (%) (ms) (%) { -------- --------- ------------ ------- ----------- { noc nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { external nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { subscr a nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { subscr b nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { [...] { subscr z nnn.nnn nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n { -------- --------- ------------ ------- ----------- { average nnn.n nnn.n nnn.n the numeric values shall be determined as follows. linkspeed. this is the rated capacity of the link between the network and the pop, expressed in millions of bits per second available for ip packets. availability. from its equipment connected within its internal network at the noc pop, at five-minute intervals, the operator will send five 1024-byte "ping" packets to each pop, including the noc pop. the five "ping" packets to a pop will be spaced one second apart. for each pop, the daily "availability" percent is calculated as... { # of "ping" responses received within one second that day { 100 * --------------------------------------------------------- { # of "ping" packets sent that day a pop will be considered to be in an up state if the response to each of the five "ping" packets has been received within one second after the "ping" is sent. otherwise, the operator will immediately declare that pop to be in a down state and will initiate a problem report. latency. for each of the five-minute intervals in availability above, calculate the average round-trip time in milliseconds for those "ping" packets for which a response was received within one second, and divide by two to obtain the one-way average. for each pop, the daily "latency" value is the average of these one-way averages. utilization. for each pop, at thirty-minute intervals, the operator will collect the values of the two snmp mib counters "ifinoctets" and "ifoutoctets" for the router's network interface. any interval in which either counter has overflowed will be discarded. the counters and interval-width times for the remaining intervals for that router for that day will be summed and used to calculate a megabytes-per-second average for each of the two counters. the "utilization" percent is determined by expressing the larger of the two averages (assuming that the link is bi-directional) as a percent of the linkspeed. network performance, monthly reporting each monthly report will show the monthly total or average for the corresponding daily value, and will be made available within three working days after the last day of that month. also, for each pop, the following two line-item values will be added to the monthly report. mttrespond. this is the average time, measured in hours from the time a pop has been declared down, for the operator's agent to arrive on-site when the cause cannot be determined and rectified by subscriber personnel upon having been contacted by the operator. mttrepair. this is the average time, measured in hours from the time a pop has been declared down, for the pop to be restored to the up state. modem-pool contention. a second section of the monthly report, separate from the foregoing, will show the number of ports, the total number of user sessions during the month, the total amount of connect time during the month, and the total amount of time that all ports were concurrently all in use (expressed as hours per day averaged over the month). network performance, monthly objectives availability. the operator will be considered by ctt to have met its availability objective that month if the monthly average of the daily "average percent availability" values is 99.5% or greater. latency. for each connection-speed offering, the operator will initially propose an expected "latency" value. the operator will be considered by ctt to have met its latency objective that month if the reported "latency" value for every pop is less than its expected "latency" value. mttrespond. the operator will be considered by ctt to have met its mttrespond objective that month if the monthly mttrespond value is less than one hour. mttrepair. the operator will be considered by ctt to have met its mttrepair objective that month if the monthly mttrepair value is less than two hours. modem-pool contention. the operator will be considered by ctt to have met its contention objective that month if the monthly average of the daily all-in-use times is less than two hours. the operator will warrant to ctt that the operator will at all times maintain sufficient capacity in all components of the network such that it will meet all of the above objectives every month. additional reporting ctt will require the best-available management information as on-going input to its review and decision-making processes regarding the network and its evolution. the operator is expected to use the network performance measurements as the basis for making timely recommendations to ctt on the need to upgrade the appropriate components of the network. from time to time, ctt will also require that the operator provide additional insight on these matters, in forms such as making presentations elaborating on the state of the network at meetings of ctt's board of directors at agreed-to times, or by making agreed-to alterations in the performance monitoring and reporting described above. payment there are to be no volume-based charges to ctt or its subscribers for the use of the network. all payments to the operator under this agreement are to be made by the subscribers in the form of a fixed charge per month, based solely on the mbps connection speed of the link from the network to the subscriber pop. in its submission, the operator will propose a "rate sheet" of such costs, for each connection-speed offering that it proposes to provide. the operator as a cooperative if the operator proposes to enter into agreements with other organizations for purposes of providing some of the services of this agreement, the operator will identify those proposed organizations in its submission. after the signing of the agreement, ctt's consent shall be required before the operator may alter the composition of the cooperative; ctt will not unreasonably withhold such consent. the operator will invite the head of ctt, or delegate(s) to be appointed as deemed appropriate by the head, to attend and participate in all meetings of the operator or the cooperative that may be relevant to ctt's interests. notwithstanding the existence of such a cooperative, the operator will warrant that ctt need look solely to the operator for provision, operation, management and performance of the network and the performance of related services under this agreement. acceptance the agreement will be considered as accepted when it is signed by ctt and the operator. the network will be considered to be accepted by ctt when the operator has meet its objectives for two consecutive months. any delay in acceptance of the network by ctt shall not change the term of the agreement. rebates for any month (after acceptance of the network) during which the operator objectives are not met for any particular component (subscriber pop, external-networks pop, or modem pool), the operator shall credit the appropriate entity (the subscriber in the case of a subscriber pop, and ctt otherwise) with a monetary rebate prorated [to be determined]. additional capacity ctt and its subscribers shall have the option of acquiring additional capacity. the operator will offer that additional capacity at the more favourable of: the prices, terms, and conditions of the agreement; or the prices, terms, and conditions then offered by the operator to its most favoured customers. marketing of the network ctt and the operator will jointly market the network to potential subscribers within the area served by the network.