transportation to newfoundland trains, planes, automobiles and boats. rather be sailing? make a sea cruise part of your travels when you visit newfoundland and labrador. then you'll know why they say half the fun is getting there. marine atlantic's modern car ferries also accommodate recreational vehicles all year round from north sydney, nova scotia to port aux basques in southwestern newfoundland. throughout the summer, a second ferry sails from north sydney to argentia, bringing you to within an hour or two of st. john's. marine atlantic ferries offer a wide variety of onboard accommodations and features, including deluxe cabins, dormitory sleepers, full meal and beverage service, live entertainment, movies, and children's activity programs.a variety of ferries and coastal boats operating on year-round and seasonal schedules can take you to island and remote coastal communities. there's a twice weekly service from lewisporte, newfoundland, that takes you and your car to happy valley-goose bay, labrador. smaller communities on the labrador coast are served by a passenger and freight (no cars) vessel that sails from st. anthony to nain and back, giving passengers an opportunity to visit remote coastal villages and experience life on a coastal freighter. there's another vessel that takes you to that little bit of france called st. pierre! whenever you're on the water, be prepared to be entertained and amazed by wonderful natural spectacles. like humpback and minke whales that appear in season, or the many varieties of seabirds that roost in huge coastal colonies. ferries are floating observation platforms. along the eastern coastline, look for icebergs bigger than you ever imagined. those who live by the sea swear that the best way to see newfoundland and labrador is from the water. come see for yourself.ferry servicenova scotia to newfoundlandyear-round vehicle and passenger ferry service is provided by marine atlantic between north sydney, nova scotia, and port aux basques, newfoundland. crossing time is 6 hours. (this ferry connects with the trans-island bus service operated by drl coach lines.)from mid-june to mid-september, an additional ferry operate between north sydney and argentia in eastern newfoundland, which is 45 kilometres from route 1 and 131 kilometres from the provincial capital of st. john's. crossing time is 12-14 hours.for rates and schedules, contact:marine atlantic reservations bureaup. o. box 250north sydney, ns b2a 3m3telephone: (902) 794-5700toll free canada and u.s.: 1-800-341-7981fax: (902) 564-7480website: http://www.marine-atlantic.ca/advance reservations are recommended. a toll-free telephone service is provided within most of north america.strait of belle islethere is daily ferry service in summer between st. barbe on newfoundland's viking trail and blanc sablon on the quebec-labrador border. take this ferry to reach route 510. crossing time is 80 minutes.for reservations or information on schedules and rates, contact: the woodward groupst. barbe ferry terminalst. barbe, nfa0k 1m0telephone: 1-800-563-6353confirmation of reservation will be made upon receipt of a non-refundable $5 deposit. bus operators must make reservations. all traffic with reservations should be at dockside 1 hour prior to departure.lewisporte to labradorcoastal labrador marine services operates a ferry service from lewisporte, newfoundland, to labrador. the ferry service operates from mid-june to mid-september, but june sailings are sometimes delayed due to ice conditions. the ferry, which carries automobiles, docks at cartwright and happy valley-goose bay, and the one-way trip takes about 35 hours.for reservations and information, please contact:coastal labrador marine servicesp.o. box 790lewisporte, nfa0g 3a0telephone: 800-563-6353fax: (709) 535-0060st. anthony to coastal labradorthe coastal boat service from st. anthony calls at some 40 isolated villages as far north as nain, labrador. the one-way trip takes about 12 days. this is a freighter service and does not carry automobiles.for reservations and rates please contact:coastal labrador marine servicesp.o. box 790lewisporte, nfa0g 3a0telephone: (709) 535-6872fax: (709) 535-0060 now you're flying. when you choose to travel to newfoundland and labrador by air, you can be certain you can reach all areas of the province and immediately get close to the wonderful sights and happenings that you're coming for. convenient schedules and flight times help you make your travel plans to suit your purpose. wherever you're departing from, there's a wide variety of international and connector airlines at your service. from anywhere in canada, from all across north america, from major gateways and cities, in the usa, and from northern europe, modern jet travel is available to bring you here. start your vacation-of-a-lifetime on a high note. get in touch with your travel agent to get your trip off the ground. airlines air canada, air canada tango, and air canada jazz operate regular air service to newfoundland and labrador, with connections available from all major centres in the united states and canada. air transat offers charter flights from toronto to newfoundland and labrador during the summer months. air canada jazz, provincial airlines, and air labrador provide regular service within newfoundland and labrador. air labrador also offers service through st. anthony to many points in labrador. provincial airlines also offers service to the french island of st. pierre. approximate travel times by air boston - st. john's 3 hours london, england - st. john's 5 hours montreal - st. john's 2 hours toronto - st. john's 3 hours halifax - st. john's 1 hr 30mins. st. john's - wabush 2 hr 15mins. (two stops) st. john's - goose bay 1 hr 40mins. (one stop) air transportation links air canada http://www.aircanada.ca/ air canada tango http://www.flytango.ca/ air canada jazz http://www.flyjazz.ca/ provincial airlines http://www.provair.com/ air labrador http://www.airlabrador.com/ air transat http://www.airtransat.com/ by rail and by road. rail service to labradorrail service between sept-îles, québec, and labrador is provided by québec north shore & labrador railway. the trip takes 10 hours.for information, contact:québec north shore & labrador railwaytelephone: (418) 968-7805/7808 québectelephone: (709) 944-8205/2490 labrador highway travel the trans-canada highway (route 1) crosses newfoundland west to east from port aux basques to st. john's, a distance of 905 kilometres. secondary highways along the route provide many fascinating, "off-the-beaten-track" side trips.route 500 is a gravel road that crosses labrador from happy valley-goose bay in the east to labrador city/wabush in the west. distance is approximately 525 kilometres and travel times of 9 hours should be expected. the road is sometimes soft in spring, and passable only by four-wheel drive vehicles. for a recorded message on road conditions between happy valley-goose bay and churchill falls, telephone (709) 896-5840. for information on the road between churchill falls and labrador city, telephone (709) 282-3406. from labrador west you can drive into quebec on partially paved route 389 which runs 581 kilometres to baie comeau on the north shore of the st. lawrence river. anticipated travel time is 8.5 hours. http://www.gov.nf.ca/roads/ the department of works, services and transportation has installed digital cameras at five weigh scale sites along the trans canada highway, in an effort to provide the motoring public in the province with the most up-to-date road and driving conditions. all 5 cameras are available via the above internet address.