final report released on canada transportation act review - july 18, 2001 français contact us help search canada site home news releases terms of reference panel members senior staff thank you for your submitting your views and comments. we are no longer accepting submissions at this time. please feel free to use this site as a reference and browse the useful information. what's new? final report recommendations interim report submissions schedule of forums research program speeches issues under consideration rail symposium no. h090/01 for release july 18, 2001 final report released on canada transportation act review ottawa — transport minister david collenette today tabled in parliament and publicly released the final report of the canada transportation act (cta)review panel. "i would again like to thank the members of the cta review panel for their hard work over the last year, and i would also like to acknowledge the valuable contributions of the many stakeholders who participated in this exercise," said mr. collenette. "the panel has produced a far-reaching report containing more than 90 recommendations." the panel's final report, entitled vision and balance, was received by the minister on june 28, 2001, and tabled in parliament today. the report's recommendations focus on: competition mergers commercial operations efficiency infrastructure urban rail corridors access for persons with disabilities sustainable development e-business "the work of the cta review panel will be one of the key building blocks in the development of a new transportation blueprint for canada," added mr. collenette. "in the meantime, the department will continue its work to ensure a safe and efficient transportation system for canada and canadians." the transportation blueprint project, which the minister launched earlier this year, is intended to renew the transportation agenda of the government of canada by developing a framework that will guide future decisions in transportation over the next decade and beyond. it will build on the work of the cta review panel, current consultations with stakeholders, the work of the transportation table on climate change  and the outcomes of the millennium transportation conference, sponsored by the minister in june 2000. backgrounders on the cta review are attached. a summary of the recommendations is provided on transport canada's web site at www.tc.gc.ca/en/blueprint/ctar-recommendations.htm and the report can be accessed at www.reviewcta-examenltc.gc.ca/english/pages/finalreport.htm. - 30 - contact: anthony polci, director of communications, office of the minister, ottawa, (613) 991-0700 transport canada is online at www.tc.gc.ca. keep up-to-date on the latest from transport canada by subscribing to news releases and speeches at www.tc.gc.ca/listserv/. this news release may be made available in alternative formats for persons with visual disabilities. backgrounder canada transportation act review when the canada transportation act (cta) came into effect in 1996, it required that a comprehensive review be undertaken within four years. the minister appointed a five-member review panel on june 29, 2000, to conduct the review. the panel was to report within one year on the economic regulation of transportation activities under the legislative authority of parliament. the minister received the cta review panel's final report on june 28, 2001, and it was tabled in parliament on july 18, 2001. mr. brian flemming, a former educator, policy advisor and director of a number of public companies, chaired the panel. mr. jean patenaude, who has over 20 years of experience in transportation and law, served as vice-chair. other members included mr. glen findlay, a farmer and former minister of highways and transportation in manitoba; the honourable bob rae, former premier of ontario and former leader of the new democratic party of ontario; and dr. william g. waters ii, professor and director of the centre for transportation studies at the university of british columbia. the minister asked that the review panel consider: the effectiveness of the legislative and regulatory environment to sustain capital expenditures required to enhance productivity and promote innovation; support for canadian transportation stakeholders in meeting global logistics requirements and adapting to the new e-business environment; public policy issues that may emerge from newly arising industry structures; government powers to support sustainable development objectives; and the advisability of measures to preserve urban rail corridors for future mass-transit use. the panel was also asked to submit a six-month interim report on ways to increase competition in the railway sector, including enhanced running rights, proposals for regional railways and other access concepts. these concepts needed to be assessed in the broader context of increasing north american integration and ensuring cost-effective service for shippers over the long term. the interim report highlighted stakeholder positions and presented a review of various proposals. the panel determined that more detailed work was necessary as their review continued to properly assess the full economic, regulatory and legal impacts of competitive rail access. the panel's final report contains more than 90 recommendations which will be considered by transport canada in the transportation blueprint policy review process which the minister launched earlier this year. the transportation blueprint project is intended to renew the transportation agenda of the government of canada by developing a strategy that will guide future decisions in transportation over the next decade and beyond. the project will build upon the work of the cta review panel, the transportation climate change table, the june 2000 transportation millennium conference and current consultations with stakeholders. further details on the cta review panel report are provided on transport canada's web site at www.tc.gc.ca/en/blueprint/ctareview.htm and the report can be accessed at www.reviewcta-examenltc.gc.ca/english/pages/finalreport.htm. july 2001 backgrounder report of the panel reviewing the canada transportation act principles the panel relied on principles such as competition, flexibility, harmonization and transparency to guide them in developing their report. to embed these principles in the act, the panel has recommended that the policy statement of the act be redrafted to reflect an efficient transportation system that makes the best use of all modes at the lowest total cost, guided by competition and market forces and where regulation is needed, it should be neutral between carriers and modes. competition in the freight rail and airline industries the panel's review focused on the concerns of shippers using rail freight services and the extent of market power exercised by the mainline railways, concerns arising from air canada's acquisition of canadian airlines international and increased concentration in the domestic airline industry, and how to review possible future mergers in the transportation sector. for the freight rail industry, the panel makes a number of recommendations including that interswitching provisions be retained, that competitive connection rates replace competitive line rates and that running rights provisions be enhanced. with respect to the airline industry, the panel recommends that the government of canada pursue the benefits of foreign competition through multilateral negotiations to liberalize air services, raise the foreign ownership ceiling, eliminate potential barriers to market entry for domestic airlines, remove the canadian transportation agency's responsibilities for monitoring air fares, and require air canada to give at least 180 days notice of services it plans to terminate in the first six months of 2003. transport mergers the panel recommends that, in parallel with the competition act review process that looks into competition issues, a process be established to review potential mergers in all transportation modes under federal jurisdiction and report to the minister of transport on public interest considerations. commercial operations in ferries, passenger trains and urban transit the panel recommends a stronger relationship between the cost of providing services and the prices charged for them as well as less reliance on public subsidies. for ferries, the panel recommends that the government of canada continue its efforts to promote innovation through commercialization and divestiture to other levels of government. the panel recommends for intercity passenger services that the government of canada continue to support rail services to remote communities but commercialize tourism services and services in the quebec city-windsor corridor. for urban transit, the panel identified cost-effective ways for local governments and agencies to improve transit's attractiveness and recommends experimentation with alternative delivery models and innovative forms of service. efficiency in other modes the panel's recommendations promote the principles of commercially driven competition and harmonization for a seamless transportation system. for marine, the panel recommends full cost recovery and early negotiations with the united states to promote greater competition in the domestic shipping industry. on the trucking side, the panel recommends that federal, provincial and territorial governments establish a time frame for developing and implementing an effective framework to govern all elements of the trucking sector. the panel also recommends for the intercity bus industry that work continue toward reducing regulatory fragmentation. discipline in the provision of infrastructure services the panel commends the government of canada's policy of placing the provision of transportation infrastructure on a more commercial footing over the past decade or more. for airports, air navigation, ports and the st. lawrence seaway, the panel believes that it may now be the time to consider a long-term strategy to transform the major ports and airports into for-profit corporations. in the meantime, the panel recommends several measures to strengthen the accountability and control of airport and port authorities. for roads, the panel recommends that the government of canada encourage provinces and territories to establish roads management and funding agencies to set charges and fees for road use. this would give road users a say in decisions about how much to charge for road use. the panel also recommends that other modes providing alternatives to road expansion should be allowed to compete for road funds. urban rail corridors the panel recommends enhancing access for commuter rail services and amending the existing process to preserve urban rail corridors for urban transit. access for persons with disabilities the panel recommends that the canadian transportation agency's power to investigate accessibility matters on its own motion be reinstated, and that the longstanding attendant airfare issue be resolved as quickly as possible. sustainable development the panel believes its proposed approach to roads management offers an opportunity to achieve needed cooperation. progress is likely to result from charging directly for road use and permitting urban transport and other potentially more sustainable modes to compete for funding with road projects. e-business the panel recommends service initiatives to facilitate and to encourage the development of e-business and e-commerce skills and training and that the government of canada continue to develop e-government initiatives. other matters in addition, the panel suggests that all transportation policy be guided by overlying principles, proposes to increase the availability of transportation data and recommends that the government of canada increase its support for transportation research. further details on the cta review panel report are provided on transport canada's web site at www.tc.gc.ca/en/blueprint/ctareview.htm and the report can be accessed at www.reviewcta-examenltc.gc.ca/english/pages/finalreport.htm. july 2001