transportation in the great lakes region businessdevelopment business assistance economic development economic indicators manufacturing trade transportation workforce development businessand environment agriculture energy fish and fisheries forests and forestry maritime pollution prevention sustainable development references agencies & organizations demographics jobs and careers transportation in the great lakes region what's new | general resources | laws | research statistics | sustainable practices | related resources transportation: air | highways | rail | water | traffic what's new toronto, york pledge to work together on regional transit initiatives the globe and mail (3/26) in a rare show of unity, politicians from the city of toronto and york region pledged yesterday to co-operate on new cross-boundary transit projects that, over time, would offer commuters an alternative to their cars. central great lakes highway pages a dream come true for your next great lakes road-trip! browse through lists of freeway exits / junctions for michigan, southwest ontario, ohio, the buffalo/niagara falls area, and now selected minor freeways in west virginia. also includes links to other central great lakes regional sites as well as a variety of other national pages. general resources the great lakes st. lawrence seaway system u.s. slsdc and canadian slsmc this joint, binational site of the u.s. saint lawrence seaway development corporation and the canadian st. lawrence seaway management corporation offers comprehensive data on water levels and wind speeds; shipping and navigation regulations and official forms; and links to every organization, port and government agency involved with the great lakes seaway system. transportation and economic development program great lakes commission promotes sustainable, resource-based economic activity and the use, development and maintenance of the great lakes-st. lawrence transportation system. laws canada transportation act transport canada complete overview of the 1996 transportation act. dot regulations, orders, policies, and legislation u.s. department of transportation legislation, regulation and other policy overview of all the agencies within the department. u.s. code, title 49 - transportation legal information institute, cornell university review of the major acts and regulations which pertain to transport canada programs. research transportation research board national research council trb aims at stimulating research concerning the nature and performance of transportation systems. illinois research programs northwestern university transportation center contributes to the identification, analysis and resolution of transportation problems and issues concerning all modes in all settings--urban, regional, national and international. urban transportation center university of illinois, chicago seeks to improve the quality of life in the chicago metropolitan area and other urban areas through the creation, dissemination and application of transportation-related knowledge. michigan transportation research institute university of michigan includes the umtri bibliography database, library catalog and works in progress. minnesota center for transportation studies university of minnesota established in 1987, the program addresses critical transportation issues with the participation of political, professional and university leaders. minnesota guidestar minnesota department of transportation guidestar is a partnership between public, private and academic sectors to develop strategies forstatewide, integrated its research, testing and deployment. ohio intelligent transportation systems ohio department of transportation its projects include early deployment planning studies, freeway management systems and commercial vehicle operations tests. pennsylvania center for intelligent transportation systems college of engineering, penn state university citrans serves as penn state's focal point for advanced technologies research and their application to surface transportation systems. pennsylvania transportation institute penn state university an interdisciplinary research unit established in 1968, pti promotes transportation research, education, and service. wisconsin center for urban transportation studies university of wisconsin, milwaukee includes information on the center's research, professional training, and curricula. national strategic highway research program wisconsin department of transportation since the 1997 construction season, a 6-mile segment of highway 29 has become a part of this project which seeks to provide answers to some of the most important questions facing highway engineers in climates that are cold and wet. statistics 1995 national transit database federal transit administration financial, economic and demographic transit data. great lakes facts and figures great lakes and seaway shipping the site provides information on, among other things, cargo records, vessel passages and distance charts. montreal trip generator analysis école polytechnique de montréal madgen is the trip generator disaggregated analysis model for the montreal region. national transportation statistics 1999 bureau of transportation statistics the report provides information on transportation and the economy; transportation safety; transportation, energy, the environment and modal profiles. statistics transportation safety board of canada latest preliminary and final occurrence figures are available for rail, air, marine and pipeline transportation. waterborne commerce statistics center u.s. army corps of engineers (usace) collects, processes, distributes, and archives vessel trip and cargo data. sustainable practices 21st century vehicles and transportation argonne national laboratory description of programs aimed at introducing energy efficiency in the production and design of transportation vehicles. illinois fund for infrastructure, roads, schools and transit (first) state of illinois take a tour of the many projects funded through this five-year, $12 billion program to build, repair and upgrade illinois' roads and bridges, mass transit systems, classroom space in growing school districts, water and sewer systems, and urban brownfields and other environmental hazards. illinois greenways and trails illinois department of natural resources (dnr) programs aiming at facilitating active, self-sustaining greenways and trails in illinois' major metro areas. translinks 21 wisconsin department of tourism a 25-year plan, the program encompasses such issues as urban planning, intercity freight and passenger transport, environmental evaluation and public involvement. related resources glin: agencies and organizations, transportation glin: energy in the great lakes region glin: maritime in the great lakes region news | calendar | great links | sotm | e-lists | info center | about glin the great lakes | environment | economy | education | maps and gis | tourism great lakes information network last modified: june 01, 2002 maintained by: jonathon d. colman, jcolman@glc.org selected photos: copyright ©john and ann mahan contact us | search | site index © 1993-2002