city of kingston, ontario, canada - overview: roads & sidewalks links site map about us communicate staff directory contact us residents' menu transportation airport automobile   parking bicycle racks kingston transit master plan streets &    sidewalks construction overview: roads    & sidewalks road closures step safe street sweeping access bus bus lines via rail overview: roads & sidewalks related links 2002 projects the city has allocated $35 million for improving roads, sidewalks and underground utilities. see if the infrastructure projects affect your area. road closures construction season is here! be sure to check for information on closures and detours. roads the road network in the city of kingston is highly developed and includes various types of roads, ranging from the four lane divided, controlled access of highway 401, to numerous local streets serving individual properties. the municipality is responsible for 803 kilometers of centerline and is responsible for all former county of frontenac roads as well as a number of provincial highways (highways #2, 15 and 38) that lie within municipal boundaries. the ministry of transportation is still responsible for highway 15, north of highway 401, and highway 2 from sydenham road to the westerly limits of the city. urban development in the city follows an east-west pattern along lake ontario and the st. lawrence river. consequently, there are a number of primary roads which run east-west through the area linking the three former municipalities. these east-west roads are inter-connected by a number of shorter major roads which run north-south. significant roadway improvements are being considered to enhance accessibility between residential, employment and recreational areas including the elliott avenue/gore road bridge crossing of the cataraqui river; the twinning of the lasalle causeway; the widening of highway no. 401 and the upgrading of highway interchanges. sidewalks within most of city central, sidewalks are an integral part of the transportation system and are located adjacent to most roads. however, most of the post-war construction in the developed portions of the former townships of kingston and pittsburgh has been oriented more towards the movement of people from place to place by vehicular traffic, rather than pedestrian traffic. movement within the rural areas of the kingston east and kingston west is almost exclusively by vehicular traffic. most popular careers press releases events calendar councillors recreation   programs wolfe island   ferry schedule city councillors kingston images business   resources join us at the grand theatre for a full summer of commedy, drama and music