pfra program: rural water development program prairie grain roads program (pgrp) what is pgrp? the prairie grain roads program is a $175 million federal initiative established to improve municipal grain roads and provincial secondary highways. traffic on these essential roads has increased as a result of changing transportation policies and the restructuring of grain handling systems. program objectives to provide government of canada assistance to upgrade some of the municipal roads and secondary provincial highways used for the transportation of grain in the prairie provinces and the peace river region of british columbia. who can apply? rural and urban municipalities and counties in manitoba, saskatchewan and alberta. the organizations that represent municipalities in manitoba (amm), saskatchewan (suma and sarm) and alberta (aamdc and auma). the provinces of manitoba, saskatchewan and british columbia. what projects are eligible? provincial secondary highways and municipal grain roads that are deteriorating or have become unsafe as a result of increased heavy grain truck traffic. the pgrp will consider funding for a road directly impacted by either of the following: grain delivery points which have experienced or will experience a significant increase in the total volume of grain-related products handled. in addition, the delivery points must exist or be under construction and have a high probability of being viable over a minimum of 10 years. or grain-related value-added industries which have experienced, or will experience, a significant increase in the volume of grain hauled into the facilities. these industries must exist or be under construction and have a high probability of being viable over a minimum of 10 years. grain-related value-added agriculture industries include, but are not limited to, concentrated animal feeding operations (e.g. hog barns) and agricultural processing plants (e.g. ethanol plants). funding allocations over a five-year period, from 2001-02 to 2005-06, canada will provide a maximum of $175 million for eligible municipal road and provincial secondary highway construction projects. the funding allocations to each western province are based on the respective provincial share of the grain-dependent branch lines as listed in the canada transportation act. cost sharing arrangements cost-sharing arrangements have been negotiated with the provinces and vary with the type of roadway and province. saskatchewan with a federal contribution of $106.8 million cost-shared with provincial and municipal governments, more than $217 million in program spending will be delivered for the construction and upgrading of secondary highways and municipal roads. manitoba approximately $34 million in federal funds will be supplemented by provincial and municipal governments to deliver more than $66 million in program spending toward the construction and upgrading of secondary highways and municipal roads. -alberta federal contributions will total more than $32 million, triggering about $47 million in construction funds for the province's municipal road system. british columbia program funds totalling $2.2 million will be provided for municipal road improvements in the peace river region of british columbia. in total ... through federal, provincial and municipal government contributions, the pgrp will generate approximately $334 million in road construction in western canada. pgrp funding by province british columbia $2.2 million alberta $32.2 million saskatchewan $106.8 million manitoba $33.8 million program total: $175 million application forms are available on the pfra programs page. for more information, please contact the pfra district office nearest you. what's new | programs | site index | search | comments | français | home modified: 2001-07-10 http://www.agr.ca/pfra/pgrpe.htm