communication canada - fact sheets - transportation in canada transportation in canada canada's history is closely linked to the history of transportation. one need only look at a map to understand the various geographical obstacles posed by the nation's landscape. transportation has always played - and will continue to play - a vital role in shaping canada's future. with a population density of approximately three persons per square kilometre, canada's 30 million people are scattered across an area that is nearly 10 million square kilometres in size, stretching 5 500 kilometres from the atlantic ocean to the pacific. what canada and canadians need is a safe, efficient, sustainable transportation system that includes all modes - air, marine, road and rail. air transportation canada's aviation industry has expanded dramatically over the years; commercial airlines carried an all-time high of over 85 million passengers in 2000. the number of registered aircraft increased by 147 percent between 1970 and 1996, and climbed to 28 242 in 2000. canada has one of the best aviation safety records in the world. the number of aviation accidents has steadily declined over the last 25 years and, in the year 2000, canada recorded the lowest ever annual number of aviation accidents involving canadian-registered aircraft. domestic air routes are served by several major operators including air canada, air canada regional, westjet, and canada 3000, as well as other independent operators which use both jet and propeller-driven equipment. while air canada remains the dominant carrier, competition among new and existing carriers is increasing and choices on domestic routes continue to grow. in december 1999, canada's smaller domestic airlines provided 18 percent of the seats serving domestic destinations. by the end of 2000, they were providing 28 percent. in 1997, some 1 512 licensed domestic carriers provided scheduled and charter services throughout the country, and there are currently some 885 air operator certificate holders providing these services. scheduled international services to and from 70 countries are provided on the basis of bilateral agreements between canada and each country. since 1994, the cornerstone of the modernization of canada's air transportation system has been the government of canada's national airports policy. the policy allows for the transfer of airports to local groups that know their market and are free to run their airport like a business while adhering to strict safety standards. as of february 28, 2001, 117 of the 136 designated airports had been transferred. in fact, 98 percent of all commercial air travellers in canada now use facilities that have been transferred. in 1996, the government of canada also transferred responsibility for the air navigation system to nav canada, which now owns and operates canada's civil air navigation service. marine transport canada has 59 509 kilometres of coastline (excluding island coastlines) plus more than 3 700 kilometres of inland waterways. the st. lawrence seaway is one of the world's largest inland waterways, stretching 3 700 kilometers from the gulf of st. lawrence to the western end of lake superior. safety in the marine sector has improved significantly over the years. marine accidents were at a 25-year low in 2000. the government of canada promotes safety by enforcing laws and regulations to ensure that certain standards are met by all ships plying canadian waters. canada's marine sector plays a major role in moving goods across the country. the sector handled a total of more than 334 million tonnes of domestic and international cargo in 1999, and in 1998 generated over $2.5 billion in revenue and directly employed more than 37 000 canadians. since the seaway opened in 1959, more than 2 billion tonnes of cargo have moved through it, to and from canada, the united states and nearly 50 other nations. the system now handles about 50 million tonnes of cargo a year through the welland canal and the montreal/lake ontario sections. beginning in 1998, the government of canada started commercializing canada's ports and the st. lawrence seaway. this put ownership in the hands of not-for-profit organizations who know the facilities best, making it easier to reduce overhead costs and allow for faster business decisions - a critical factor in remaining competitive in the maritime transportation sector. road transportation canada has more automobiles per person than any other country in the world except the united states, with at least one automobile for every two canadians. although highway traffic has doubled over the past 25 years, canada has seen a 50 percent decline in traffic fatalities. there are more than 900 000 kilometres of roads and highways in canada, and the national highway system is over 25 000 kilometres in length. canada also boasts the longest highway in the world - the trans-canada highway - and one of the busiest sections of highway in the world - highway 401 through the greater toronto area - rivaled only by interstate 5 in california. there are also over 48 000 bridges on canadian roads and streets. over 25 000 are on the provincial/territorial highway network, close to 22 000 are on municipal or city streets and 700 are the responsibility of the government of canada. perhaps the best known bridge in canada is the 12.9 kilometre confederation bridge, joining borden-carleton, prince edward island, and cape jourimain, new-brunswick. the bridge, which opened on may 31, 1997, is the longest span over ice covered waters in the world. the confederation bridge is privately managed, maintained and operated by strait crossing development inc. and its subsidiary company, strait crossing bridge limited (scbl). canada's roads support one of the most highly used forms of cargo transportation - trucking. in 1999, trucking revenues and services (including for-hire, private and courier) were valued at approximately $43 billion. in 2000, over 600 000 large trucks weighing 4.5 tonnes or more were registered in canada. intercity buses provide the most extensive public passenger services in canada. in 1999, approximately 13 million passengers were carried on over 3 000 motor coaches, school buses and other vehicles used in inter-city scheduled bus service operations. technology is also playing an increasingly important role in canada's highway system. for example, there is a pilot project in place to test the feasibility of allowing specially equipped trucks to cross the u.s. border without stopping; the time savings could make a significant difference to shippers, especially those hauling perishable goods. rail transport the railway evokes images of canada's history, and played a major role in bringing the country together. it continues to be an important part of canada's transportation network; the rail sector alone handled 310 million tonnes of freight in 1999. safety in the railway sector continues to improve. railway accident rates have been steadily declining in the last decade, and crossing fatalities have reached their lowest levels in more than a decade. although the canadian national railway (cn) and canadian pacific railway (cp) are responsible for operating most of canada's rail freight services, there are approximately 78 other canadian railways which operate on some 50 000 kilometres of track. the portion of the rail network controlled by these carriers has increased significantly since 1996, and they now control more than 33 percent of the canadian rail network. via rail canada, a federal crown corporation, provides passenger rail service to canadians. in 2000, some 4.2 million rail passengers travelled on via rail, and on regional and shortline railways. technology canadians have a history of being at the forefront of innovation across the spectrum of transportation technology. with the launch of the alouette 1 in 1962, canada became only the third nation in space and has since earned an international reputation in aerospace technology with such developments as the canadarm, which was designed for the u.s. space shuttle program and is in ongoing use. more recent aviation developments include a new commuter turbo-prop and turbo-fan aircraft, as well as a unique aircraft that can scoop up 6.6 tonnes of water from a lake in ten seconds and drop it on a forest fire with pinpoint accuracy. research is also being conducted into safer log trucks and airplane de-icing regulations. canada is a world leader in the development of alternative fuel sources. the ballard fuel cell, for example, will power the cars of the future with no byproducts other than hot water; the auto industry has now invested hundreds of millions of dollars into this new venture. equally innovative is the new "clean air truck," which runs on natural gas with diesel pilot ignition; this truck emits 85 percent fewer smog-producing byproducts than do regular trucks. some of the earliest intelligent transportation system (its) initiatives also took place in canada, including the world's first computer-controlled traffic signal system in 1958. since then, canada has seen the implementation of a cashless toll system on ontario's highway 407, the development of transit fleet management and passenger information systems, commercial vehicle operations systems and international border crossing initiatives that facilitate the movement of goods in the north american free trade zone. sustainability transportation has always been critical to the development and growth of canada and the canadian economy. it is also becoming increasingly important in its impact on canada's environment. transportation is the single largest source of greenhouse gases in canada, accounting for about 25 percent of total emissions, and contributes to air pollution, smog and traffic congestion in major urban areas. in october 2000, federal, provincial and territorial ministers of environment and energy released canada's national implementation strategy on climate change, along with a first national business plan. the government of canada's action plan 2000 on climate change, which represents the government of canada's contribution to this business plan, has a substantial transportation component. it outlines five new initiatives to improve urban transportation, new vehicle fuel efficiency, the use of less greenhouse gas intensive fuels, and the efficiency of our freight system. ensuring that canada's transportation system is environmentally friendly will depend largely on changing people's behaviour by raising awareness of the issues themselves, and by promoting concrete actions and choices that individuals can take to reduce the adverse environmental impacts of transportation and to improve the quality of life. catalogue no. pf3-2/35-2001 isbn 0-662-65628-8 © minister of public works and government services, 2001 updated: 2001-10-17 important notices