canada transportation act review- backgrounders français contact us help search canada site home news releases terms of reference panel members senior staff thank you for your submitting your views and comments. we are no longer accepting submissions at this time. please feel free to use this site as a reference and browse the useful information. competitive rail access and shipper protections the merger review process the airline industry marine transport governance of the newly commercialized infrastructure providers paying for the roads ferries, intercity buses and passenger trains the national interest in urban transportation preserving urban rail corridors transportation accessibility for persons with disabilities the trucking industry the impact of e-business on transportation the environment and sustainable development public policy development other legislative changes canada transportation act review: list of recommendations the following is a list of the recommendations of the canada transportation act review panel. the full text of the final report, vision and balance, is also available. competitive rail access and shipper protections recommendation 5.1 the panel recommends that sections 113 to 115 of the canada transportation act be replaced with a requirement that a railway publish in its tariff the level of service attached to rates in the tariff. recommendation 5.2 the panel recommends that the canadian transportation agency continue to have the authority to determine whether a railway has met the level of service commitments in a tariff or confidential contract and, in the event of a breach, to order the railway to take specific steps to meet those commitments. recommendation 5.3 the panel recommends that the existing interswitching limits be retained. recommendation 5.4 the panel recommends that section 128 of the act, requiring the canadian transportation agency to determine fixed interswitching rates, be amended to allow the agency to prescribe maximum rates, leaving it open to shippers and railways to enter into commercial arrangements for lower interswitching rates, if appropriate. recommendation 5.5 the panel recommends transforming the competitive line rate provisions of the canada transportation act into competitive connection rate (ccr) provisions by removing the requirement that shippers obtain an agreement with a connecting carrier before requesting the rate from the canadian transportation agency; making the remedy available only to shippers with no “alternative, effective, adequate and competitive” means of transporting the goods that would be subject to the rate and where the agency determines that the rate is substantially above rates paid by other shippers of the specific commodity under similar conditions and that cannot be explained by apparent cost and value of service considerations; requiring the shipper and the railway to attempt to negotiate a new rate within a 30-day period after the agency determines that a ccr is required; requiring the agency, where the shipper and carrier do not agree on the rate, to establish a ccr, subject to the commercially fair and reasonable test of section 112, with the rate falling in the range of the 75th percentile to the 90th percentile of revenue per tonne-kilometre for movements of the same commodity over similar distances and under the same conditions and levels of service as the ccr portion, together with the interswitching rate for the first 30 kilometres; allowing for a ccr to be established by the agency for a period of one year; prohibiting the shipper from requesting final offer arbitration of any rate being reviewed or established under the ccr process; prohibiting the shipper from requesting final offer arbitration for the portion of the movement by the connecting carrier; prohibiting the shipper from requesting a ccr for a rate established by final offer arbitration; and giving the governor in council authority to suspend the ccr provision if it determines that railway viability is seriously affected by the operation of the ccr provision. recommendation 5.6 the panel recommends that the substantial commercial harm test in sections 27(2), (3) and (5) of the canada transportation act be repealed. recommendation 5.7 the panel recommends that the canadian transportation agency, when establishing interswitching rates and competitive connection rates, continue to be guided by the requirement that rates it establishes be commercially fair and reasonable to all parties. recommendation 5.8 the panel recommends that an arbitrator be required, in every arbitration, to consider whether a shipper has alternative, effective, adequate and competitive means to transport the goods that are the subject of the arbitration. recommendation 5.9 the panel recommends that the grain handling and transportation system be moved to a more commercial basis, which could lead to repeal of the revenue cap on grain rates. recommendation 5.10 the panel recommends that any railway operator, whether under federal or provincial jurisdiction, have the right to apply to the canadian transportation agency for running rights, provided the operator meets all necessary operating and safety standards and is adequately insured. recommendation 5.11 the panel recommends that the running rights provision of the canada transportation act be amended to allow an applicant to seek traffic solicitation rights. recommendation 5.12 the panel recommends that a railway operator proposing to apply to the canadian transportation agency for running rights be required to advise the infrastructure owner at least 60 days before making the application to encourage negotiations between the parties. recommendation 5.13 the panel recommends that, as part of its public interest determination on a running rights application, the canadian transportation agency consider, at a minimum, the adequacy of existing service, the existence of competitive alternatives, the impact on all users and shippers on lines where running rights are sought, the impact on system efficiency, the financial and operational capability of the applicant, the willingness of the applicant to allow reciprocal access to its lines where applicable, and the impact on the financial viability of the infrastructure owner. recommendation 5.14 the panel recommends that guest operators with traffic solicitation rights have the obligation to publish rates at the request of a shipper and to specify the level of service to be provided as part of published tariffs, have the right to enter into confidential contracts with shippers, and have authority to limit liability for loss or damage of a shipper’s goods only in accordance with section 137 of the canada transportation act. recommendation 5.15 the panel recommends that interswitching, competitive connection rates and final offer arbitration be suspended with respect to the movement of traffic on lines served by an infrastructure owner and one or more guest operators with traffic solicitation rights. recommendation 5.16 the panel recommends that running rights orders issued by the canadian transportation agency include a requirement that the guest operator provide reasonable notice when it intends to withdraw service on a line. recommendation 5.17 the panel recommends that running rights compensation be negotiated between the parties. if the parties are unable to reach a commercial agreement in 90 days, either party could ask the canadian transportation agency to set compensation in accordance with the panel’s rail access pricing proposals. recommendation 5.18 the panel recommends that, where traffic solicitation is sought, the rail access charge consist of compensation for all incremental costs the guest railway imposes on the host; and a contribution to the common costs of rail ownership that approaches the implicit contribution the infrastructure owner is earning on the specific traffic being solicited. recommendation 5.19 the panel recommends that the following considerations be used as a guide in determining compensation for track access without traffic solicitation rights: access fees should cover all incremental costs the host incurs as a result of the guest railway’s operations; access fees that differentiate among users on the basis of the value they place on rail access should be permitted; access fees based on differential pricing should not be allowed to help infrastructure owners generate more revenue than they need in total to cover costs, including a reasonable return on their investment; and access fees for government-owned or -directed passenger and commuter rail services should be limited to an amount that compensates infrastructure owners for the additional costs they incur, including congestion and delay costs, and provides a reasonable after-tax return on the book value of the capital assets used by the guest. recommendation 5.20 the panel recommends that the minister of transport ensure that implementation of the access proposals recommended in this report comply with all applicable requirements of international and internal trade law. recommendation 5.21 the panel recommends that railways be required to identify and publish a list of rail sidings in operation on their network and available for producer car loading. the panel recommends further that railways be required to give 60 days public notice before removing a siding from operation. [return to top] the merger review process recommendation 6.1 the panel recommends the establishment of a new process for reviewing proposed transportation mergers, either within modes or cross-modally, to examine issues of broad national or transnational interest separately from competition issues considered under the merger review provisions of the competition act. recommendation 6.2 the existing competition act process should continue to be used to evaluate whether a proposed merger in the transportation sector would prevent or lessen competition. recommendation 6.3 the proposed public interest review process would have the following steps: parties notify the minister of transport of the proposed merger at the same time notice is served to the commissioner of competition. the notice to the minister includes a statement of public interest impact, including the objectives of the merger; the impact of the merger on the transportation sector concerned and on the industry sectors it serves; possible costs and benefits to shippers or passengers; implications with respect to network rationalization and the labour force; the regional impact of the merger; the impact of the proposed merger on the overall structure of the transportation sector concerned; and remedial or mitigating actions proposed by the merging parties to address public interest concerns. if the minister concludes there are significant public interest issues related to the proposed merger, he/she would appoint a public interest evaluator to evaluate the proposed merger. the public interest evaluator evaluates public interest issues identified by the minister, based on the statement of public interest impact provided by the parties to the proposed merger, and can hold hearings to receive input on public interest issues. parties to a merger may amend the statement of public interest impact in response to concerns expressed by the public interest evaluator on public interest issues. the public interest evaluator interacts with the competition bureau to discuss and co-ordinate their respective investigations. at the conclusion of the evaluation, the public interest evaluator reports to the minister, recommending, with respect to public interest issues, that the proposed merger be allowed to proceed; be allowed to proceed, subject to specified conditions; or not be allowed to proceed. after receiving the report of the public interest evaluator, the minister reviews it and makes a recommendation to the governor in council. approval should be subject to any conditions the governor in council considers relevant to protect the public interest. where the governor in council approves a merger subject to the parties to the merger meeting conditions to protect the public interest, a process to ensure compliance through monitoring and enforcement must be put in place. the competition bureau and the public interest evaluator should be encouraged to work closely with the appropriate authorities in other countries when considering transnational mergers. recommendation 6.4 the panel recommends that the proposed merger review process apply to all transportation modes under federal jurisdiction. [return to top]the airline industry recommendation 7.1 the panel recommends that the government enter into negotiations with the united states and mexico to create a north american common aviation area in which carriers from canada, the u.s. and mexico would compete freely. as a back-up option if negotiations do not succeed, the panel recommends that the government negotiate with other countries for the reciprocal granting of modified sixth freedom rights and of rights of establishment for foreign-owned domestic carriers. recommendation 7.2 the panel encourages the government to pursue actively canada’s interest in a more liberal international environment for air services. recommendation 7.3 the panel recommends that the limit on the voting shares of canadian airlines that can be held by foreigners be raised to 49%. recommendation 7.4 the panel recommends that carriers be given recourse to the canadian transportation agency for disputes over access to airport facilities and that the agency be given power to provide an appropriate remedy in situations where airlines are found to be subject to unfair treatment in terms of prices charged or type and quality of services provided. recommendation 7.5 the panel recommends that the maximum annual domestic passenger revenues used to determine eligibility for access to air canada’s frequent flyer program be raised to $500 million. the panel recommends further that the requirement to provide access to aeroplan be extended until the minister of transport determines that competition in the domestic market has strengthened to the point where it is no longer necessary. recommendation 7.6 the panel recommends that the canada transportation act be amended to remove the canadian transportation agency’s powers to review passenger and cargo fares on monopoly routes upon complaint; to order additional fare classes on monopoly routes if these are available on similar competitive routes; and to audit carriers proactively and take appropriate action. recommendation 7.7 the panel recommends that the government require air canada to provide 180 days notice of services it plans to terminate in the first six months of 2003. [return to top]marine transport recommendation 8.1 the panel recommends that full recovery of the costs of marine services attributable to users be pursued as a long-term goal. recommendation 8.2 the panel recommends that opportunities to commercialize marine services be sought. recommendation 8.3 the panel recommends that the government make clear its commitment to eventual elimination of the liner conference exemptions from competition law and that it actively pursue multilateral agreement among international partners to do so. recommendation 8.4 the panel recommends that the government make clear to the government of the united states its preference for eliminating the restrictions on entry to domestic shipping in the coasting trade act and offer to negotiate bilateral elimination of equivalent restrictions. recommendation 8.5 the panel recommends that the 25% duty on vessels built or purchased outside canada be eliminated. [return to top] governance of the newly commercialized infrastructure providers recommendation 9.1 the panel recommends that principles be developed to govern the setting of airport fees for aeronautical services; that airports be required to provide adequate notice of their intention to revise charges to airlines; and that, in the case of disputes over adherence to the principles or process, there be a right of complaint to the canadian transportation agency. recommendation 9.2 the panel recommends that a for-profit subsidiary of an airport authority be allowed to provide a service to the airport only if it is the successful bidder in a fair and open competitive tendering process; if an airport authority in its own right (rather than through a subsidiary) undertakes activities that compete with commercial firms, it be required to demonstrate that the decision is in the airport’s financial interest; and airport land use regulations be required to adhere to basic rules of fairness and equity, including the requirement that affected parties be adequately notified and consulted about proposed changes in airport policy. recommendation 9.3 the panel recommends that legislation be introduced specifying governance requirements for laas and caas and indicating the penalties that can be imposed in cases of non-compliance. recommendation 9.4 the panel recommends that well defined limits be placed on airport authorities’ use of for-profit subsidiaries. recommendation 9.5 the panel recommends that the airport authorities’ legislated exemption from the income tax act be removed. recommendation 9.6 the panel recommends that airports be required to put in place comprehensive performance measurement systems that adhere to guidelines developed by transport canada. for major proposed capital projects, airports should be required to undertake an economic assessment, consult with airport users, and ensure that stakeholders’ positions are made known to interested parties. recommendation 9.7 the panel recommends that transport canada review its proposed aircraft emergency intervention services regulations to determine whether the standards are appropriate based on a careful assessment of costs and benefits. recommendation 9.8 the panel recommends that a limited program of support be introduced to help smaller airports cover their operating expenditures. the program should be financed from air system revenues and be designed to encourage improved efficiency and create incentives for airport rationalization. recommendation 9.9 the panel recommends that the provisions of the canada marine act making the crown responsible for liabilities of canada port authorities be removed. recommendation 9.10 the panel recommends that borrowing limits in the letters patent of canada port authorities be removed. recommendation 9.11 the panel recommends that the number of directors on canada port authority boards appointed directly by the minister of transport be reduced to two. recommendation 9.12 the panel recommends that well defined limits be placed on canada port authorities’ use of for-profit subsidiaries. recommendation 9.13 the panel recommends that a for-profit canada port authority subsidiary be allowed to provide a service to the port only if it is the successful bidder in a fair and open competitive tendering process; and if a port in its own right (rather than through a subsidiary) undertakes activities that compete with commercial firms, it be required to demonstrate that the decision is in the port’s financial interest. recommendation 9.14 the panel recommends that canada port authorities be required to develop comprehensive performance measurement systems and to make the resulting information publicly available. recommendation 9.15 the panel recommends that a review of the canada marine act be initiated by the beginning of 2002. [return to top] paying for the roads recommendation 10.1 the panel recommends that the world bank/new zealand concepts of road and transport funding and management agencies be adapted for canada, including the following features: users should pay for roads, by means of appropriate charges and fees; charges for roads should be based on costs imposed, differentiated so far as practical by nature of vehicle, type of road, and amount of congestion; managers of the road network should have responsibility for both charging and spending decisions; users should be involved in decisions on charges and expenditures; and alternatives to road spending in other modes should be allowed to compete for road funds. [return to top] ferries, intercity buses and passenger trains recommendation 11.1 the panel endorses initiatives to reduce subsidies to ferry services and recommends that commercialization and divestiture of responsibility for local service decisions to other levels of government continue. recommendation 11.2 the panel recommends that the minister of transport continue the process already initiated to address regulatory fragmentation in the bus industry. recommendation 11.3 the panel recommends that the national safety code be structured such that all vehicles carrying paying passengers are subject to a consistent pattern of safety regulation that takes into account the scale of the operation and risk exposure but does not rest entirely on vehicle size. recommendation 11.4 the panel recommends that via’s current services be reviewed to ascertain the extent to which they have become tourism products; if they have, they should be designated as such. recommendation 11.5 the panel recommends a full cost recovery policy for quebec city-windsor corridor rail and its commercialization. as a first step, corridor operations as a whole should be separated organizationally from via’s other services. management should be directed to pursue commercialization and to report cost recovery progress for each of the corridor services on a fully allocated basis. management should be given full authority to terminate services that prove unsuccessful. recommendation 11.6 the panel recommends that, after quebec city-windsor corridor services have been separated from the other routes that via rail now operates, legislation be enacted to give the entity providing via corridor services the commercial freedom required to become and remain self-sufficient. recommendation 11.7 the panel recommends that each rail service now subsidized to provide access to remote communities be reviewed to determine the present level of remoteness; whether a federal contribution toward development of road access (by the province in question) might constitute a more effective and efficient solution to the access issue; whether an air, bus or other service, provided by the private sector, might prove superior to rail; and whether the private sector could provide an adequate rail service more economically under contract than is possible for via rail. recommendation 11.8 the panel recommends that the policy of commercializing passenger services, including divestiture to the private sector and other levels of government, continue. further, where federal subsidy of passenger travel is deemed desirable, federal financial support should be reassessed periodically and carrier- and mode-neutral mechanisms to allocate the subsidies in a manner that least distorts the commercial market should be used. [return to top] the national interest in urban transportation recommendation 12.1 the panel recommends that transit operating agencies and their funders seek the most cost-effective ways of improving their services. recommendation 12.2 the panel recommends that experimentation with innovative forms of service (smaller vehicles, shared taxis) be encouraged. recommendation 12.3 the panel recommends that urban transit be permitted to qualify for funding from road user charges. recommendation 12.4 the panel recommends that payments to transit authorities be made on the basis of their actual performance in inducing shifts from private automobile use to transit. [return to top] preserving urban rail corridors recommendation 13.1 the panel recommends that section 118 of the canada transportation act, as amended by the panel’s proposals, be made available to commuter authorities. recommendation 13.2 the panel recommends that future commuter rail contracts be made public and that current contracts be made public unless one of the parties can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the canadian transportation agency that the contract contains commercially sensitive information and that it would be harmed by its release. recommendation 13.3 the panel recommends that section 145 of the canada transportation act be amended to require that a railway offer lines it intends to discontinue to commuter rail authorities before offering them to a municipal or district government, provided the line has been identified officially as being required for urban transit purposes. recommendation 13.4 the panel recommends that land being transferred under the canada transportation act process at net salvage value be valued at no more than its ‘across the fence’ value, with no premium for assembly applied. recommendation 13.5 the panel recommends that railway companies be required to offer for sale at net salvage value, to the relevant province, commuter authority or municipal government(s), a spur or other line not covered by the current transfer and discontinuance process, provided the line has been identified officially as being required for urban transit purposes. recommendation 13.6 the panel recommends that the purchase of railway lines for use as urban transit corridors (including spurs identified through the process set out in the previous recommendation) qualify for funding consideration from the provincial and territorial roads and transport funds the panel proposes. [return to top] transportation accessibility for persons with disabilities recommendation 14.1 the panel recommends that the canadian transportation agency be given the power to investigate accessibility matters on its own motion. recommendation 14.2 the panel recommends that the attendant air fare issue be resolved as quickly as possible. [return to top] the trucking industry recommendation 15.1 the panel recommends that federal, provincial and territorial governments collectively recognize the need for a cohesive framework to govern the multiple elements of the trucking sector. the panel recommends further that jurisdictions establish a time frame for developing and implementing an effective framework to govern all elements of the trucking industry. [return to top] the impact of e-business on transportation recommendation 16.1 the panel recommends the establishment of a co-operative program with the national carrier associations in all modes to facilitate and encourage the development of e-business and e-commerce skills and training in the application of the technologies. recommendation 16.2 the panel recommends that the government continue to develop e-government initiatives aimed at streamlining both internal and government/industry communication processes. [return to top] the environment and sustainable development recommendation 17.1 the panel recommends that the statement of objectives of national transportation policy in the canada transportation act recognize the environmental goals of national policy. [return to top] public policy development recommendation 18.1 the panel recommends that the minister of transport take the necessary steps to make available for canadian operations, carriers and airports information similar to that routinely available in the united states. recommendation 18.2 the panel recommends that the government and transportation industries expand the collection of transportation data and develop new procedures to reflect changes occurring in the domestic and global economies. recommendation 18.3 the panel recommends that the canada transportation act be amended to ensure that transportation data can be shared across federal departments. recommendation 18.4 the panel recommends that the minister of transport ensure that detailed information on the extent and cost of federally supported transport infrastructure or carrier services be made available and encourages similar actions by other levels of government. recommendation 18.5 the panel recommends that penalties be introduced that will provide effective incentives to comply with data reporting requirements. recommendation 18.6 the panel recommends that the restriction on monitoring in subsection 50(3) of the canada transportation act be repealed. recommendation 18.7 the panel recommends that the government increase its support for transportation research. recommendation 18.8 the panel recommends that transport policy and legislation be guided by underlying principles, such as those identified in this report, that are common to all transportation modes. [return to top] other legislative changes recommendation 19.1 the panel recommends that provisions of the canada transportation act imposing an obligation or prohibiting specified actions without mandating the canadian transportation agency to administer them be reviewed and, if necessary, amended to provide that the agency can enforce them on complaint. recommendation 19.2 the panel recommends that section 29 of the canada transportation act be amended to give the canadian transportation agency the power to extend the 120-day time limit on its own motion where not doing so would cause serious prejudice to a party. the agency should be required to report the circumstances where it exceeds its statutory time limit in its annual report. recommendation 19.3 the panel recommends that the canadian transportation agency be given the statutory authority to engage in mediation and to establish rules setting out when mediation may be required before complaints or applications enter a formal decision process. recommendation 19.4 the panel recommends that section 53 of the canada transportation act be brought into line with the national transportation policy, as amended by the panel’s proposals. recommendation 19.5 the panel recommends that the minister of transport consider whether legislative amendments are needed to give a review panel the power to compel the production of documents. recommendation 19.6 the panel recommends that the minister of transport consider whether the existing exemption in section 98 of the canada transportation act is appropriate. recommendation 19.7 the panel recommends that the provisions of the canada transportation act allowing railways to appoint police constables be repealed and that responsibility for policy questions on railway police issues be transferred to the appropriate government department. [return to top] july 2001