report of the panel reviewing the canada transportation act français contact us help search canada site home about us media room environment emergencies air marine rail road major issues • what's new • site map • our offices quick search: • news releases • backgrounders • speeches • the latest ... from transport canada • what the minister said • media contacts • fighting terrorism in canada • hot news • hot news archive • upcoming events • photo archives • info sheets • reports • safety issues • related sites transport canada > media room > backgrounders report of the panel reviewing the canada transportation act principles the panel relied on principles such as competition, flexibility, harmonization and transparency to guide them in developing their report. to embed these principles in the act, the panel has recommended that the policy statement of the act be redrafted to reflect an efficient transportation system that makes the best use of all modes at the lowest total cost, guided by competition and market forces and where regulation is needed, it should be neutral between carriers and modes. competition in the freight rail and airline industries the panel’s review focused on the concerns of shippers using rail freight services and the extent of market power exercised by the mainline railways, concerns arising from air canada’s acquisition of canadian airlines international and increased concentration in the domestic airline industry, and how to review possible future mergers in the transportation sector. for the freight rail industry, the panel makes a number of recommendations including that interswitching provisions be retained, that competitive connection rates replace competitive line rates and that running rights provisions be enhanced. with respect to the airline industry, the panel recommends that the government of canada pursue the benefits of foreign competition through multilateral negotiations to liberalize air services, raise the foreign ownership ceiling, eliminate potential barriers to market entry for domestic airlines, remove the canadian transportation agency’s responsibilities for monitoring air fares, and require air canada to give at least 180 days notice of services it plans to terminate in the first six months of 2003. transport mergers the panel recommends that, in parallel with the competition act review process that looks into competition issues, a process be established to review potential mergers in all transportation modes under federal jurisdiction and report to the minister of transport on public interest considerations. commercial operations in ferries, passenger trains and urban transit the panel recommends a stronger relationship between the cost of providing services and the prices charged for them as well as less reliance on public subsidies. for ferries, the panel recommends that the government of canada continue its efforts to promote innovation through commercialization and divestiture to other levels of government. the panel recommends for intercity passenger services that the government of canada continue to support rail services to remote communities but commercialize tourism services and services in the quebec city-windsor corridor. for urban transit, the panel identified cost-effective ways for local governments and agencies to improve transit’s attractiveness and recommends experimentation with alternative delivery models and innovative forms of service. efficiency in other modes the panel’s recommendations promote the principles of commercially driven competition and harmonization for a seamless transportation system. for marine, the panel recommends full cost recovery and early negotiations with the united states to promote greater competition in the domestic shipping industry. on the trucking side, the panel recommends that federal, provincial and territorial governments establish a time frame for developing and implementing an effective framework to govern all elements of the trucking sector. the panel also recommends for the intercity bus industry that work continue toward reducing regulatory fragmentation. discipline in the provision of infrastructure services the panel commends the government of canada’s policy of placing the provision of transportation infrastructure on a more commercial footing over the past decade or more. for airports, air navigation, ports and the st. lawrence seaway, the panel believes that it may now be the time to consider a long-term strategy to transform the major ports and airports into for-profit corporations. in the meantime, the panel recommends several measures to strengthen the accountability and control of airport and port authorities. for roads, the panel recommends that the government of canada encourage provinces and territories to establish roads management and funding agencies to set charges and fees for road use. this would give road users a say in decisions about how much to charge for road use. the panel also recommends that other modes providing alternatives to road expansion should be allowed to compete for road funds. urban rail corridors the panel recommends enhancing access for commuter rail services and amending the existing process to preserve urban rail corridors for urban transit. access for persons with disabilities the panel recommends that the canadian transportation agency’s power to investigate accessibility matters on its own motion be reinstated, and that the longstanding attendant airfare issue be resolved as quickly as possible. sustainable development the panel believes its proposed approach to roads management offers an opportunity to achieve needed cooperation. progress is likely to result from charging directly for road use and permitting urban transport and other potentially more sustainable modes to compete for funding with road projects. e-business the panel recommends service initiatives to facilitate and to encourage the development of e-business and e-commerce skills and training and that the government of canada continue to develop e-government initiatives. other matters in addition, the panel suggests that all transportation policy be guided by overlying principles, proposes to increase the availability of transportation data and recommends that the government of canada increase its support for transportation research. further details on the cta review panel report are provided on transport canada’s web site at www.tc.gc.ca/en/blueprint/ctareview.htm and the report can be accessed at www.reviewcta-examenltc.gc.ca/english/pages/finalreport.htm. july 2001 last updated: 2001-10-02 important notices transport canada pacific region prairie & northern region ontario region quebec region atlantic region about us our offices organization and senior management departmental publications programs and services acts regulations [more...] media room news releases backgrounders speeches the latest from transport canada media contacts [more...] environment environmental protection sustainable development climate change [more...] emergencies emergencies and crises emergency preparedness security transport dangerous goods [more...] air our offices passengers pilots flight instructors maintenance technicians commercial airlines airports and infrastructure security transport dangerous goods [more...] marine our offices small commercial vessels large commercial vessels pleasure craft marine infrastructure transport dangerous goods [more...] rail our offices safety at railway crossings rail infrastructure grain handling and transportation transport dangerous goods [more...] road our offices drivers passengers child safety motor carriers infrastructure transport dangerous goods [more...] major issues fighting terrorism in canada strategic highway infrastructure program tc government on-line transportation blueprint government of canada initiatives [more...]