exporting your products - albertaport online - roadway system physical distribution and logistics transportation infrastructure transportation industry freight forwarders international trade regulations transportation directory glossary printer friendly roadway system there are over 900,000 kilometres of public roads (two-lane equivalent) in canada. these public roads are the principal infrastructure used in the domestic movement of passengers and freight. this vast network reaches into every province and territory, and provides for the movement of an estimated 400 million tonnes of freight annually. public roads in canada approximately 318,000 kilometres of this national network are paved, with 17,000 kilometres (less than 2%) built to freeway standards. almost two-thirds of canada's public roads (some 585,000 kilometres) are located outside the country's most densely populated areas. these roads are either gravel, treated or of earthen design. significant to prairie agriculture, almost 400,000 kilometres of these unpaved roads (close to 70%) are located within the provinces of alberta, saskatchewan and manitoba. responsibility for canadian public roads responsibility for building and maintaining public roads is divided between the three levels of government - federal, provincial and municipal. municipal governments control about 73% of this infrastructure and represent the largest collective stakeholder in canada's public road network. the provincial and territorial governments maintain responsibility for a further 25%, while the federal government lays claim to less than 2%. public roads in alberta there are over 181,000 kilometres of public roads in alberta - approximately 20% of the total national network. the scope of this infrastructure ranks second only to saskatchewan, when compared to all other provincial and territorial networks. almost 140,000 kilometres of alberta's public roads are either gravel, treated or earthen in nature. these largely fall under municipal jurisdiction. responsibility for the 41,000 kilometres of paved roads is shared between the municipalities (26,000 kilometres) and the province (15,000 kilometres.) these roads make up the principal arterial network used in both private and commercial motor transport throughout the province. national highway system of canada some 3,600 route-kilometres of alberta's provincial highways are also part of canada's larger national highway system (national map). encompassing the 7,300 kilometre trans canada highway, and totaling some 24,400 route-kilometres, this network comprises the principal highway routes used in both interprovincial and international trade. using the most direct routes possible, the national highway system is designed to connect all: provincial and territorial capitals (with the exception of nunavut) major provincial population and commercial centers major ports of entry or exit with the united states highway system the connection between the canadian and american highway systems is provided through 32 border crossings - 18 representing primary trade gateways. public roads in the united states with approximately 6.4 million route-kilometres of public roads in the united states, the american network is significantly larger than canada's. much of this difference can be explained through contrasting size and populations. like canada, only 40% of the us network is unpaved - much of which is concentrated in the agricultural states of the mid-west. as in canada, us public roads are maintained by the respective local (75%), state (20%), and federal governments (5%.) national highway system of the united states the us highway system encompasses a network of approximately 260,000 route-kilometres. as in canada, this system is the primary arterial network for moving passengers and freight throughout the country. the cornerstone of this network is the us interstate highway system. it is a transcontinental network with 75,000 kilometres of multi-laned, controlled-access infrastructure. it carries in excess of 20% of all american automobile and truck traffic. related websites: alberta infrastructure council of ministers responsible for transportation and highway safety us federal highway administration transportation association of canada investing in alberta | locating your business in alberta | exporting your products | alberta products and services | starting your business | about alberta | fast facts | alberta economy | statistics and publications | industry information | events calendar | about aed | ask the expert | website map | search | contact us | what's new | media releases | major events | you have reached the official website of alberta economic development. copyright © 2002 government of alberta, canada comments or questions concerning website content or general inquiries to alberta economic development can be forwarded electronically via alberta connects. technical comments or questions may be forwarded to our web coordinator. please read our privacy statement and disclaimer and statement of copyright.