work offers and acceptance work work offers and acceptance before you accept an on-going (permanent) position, take the time necessary to evaluate the offer. don't jump at the first job you get. if you make a mistake, you might be stuck in an unsuitable position. with the negative feelings that would likely arise, you will find it difficult to talk about that job in interviews for other positions. however, weigh the fear of being unemployed with the reality of the job market. analyze the fit. don't rely on a "feeling". when deciding on a part-time, summer, co-op, internship job offer, evaluate benefits in terms of your longer-term goals. employers often use this type of short-term employment as a method to determine if they would like to offer you a more permanent type of work in the future. assess: company/organization comfort in field or type of industry, e.g., government/private sector size, growth rate, market potential facilities and working conditions desire to work there for a period of time management and co-workers stable management interest in employee wellbeing, e.g., e.a.p., pay, training, layoff/restructuring support professional calibre compatible approach on policies job duties and responsibilities initial opportunities offered utilization of your abilities training programs, inside/outside of co. broadening of experience for future jobs amount of travel, overtime job compatibility with your medium/long-range career goals potential for promotion how and by whom performance is judged; whether a salary review is included number of realistic opportunities for promotion, and to what level compensation starting salary, long-term outlook other benefits, e.g., insurance, profit sharing, tuition assistance, rental car community geographic area, environment desirable amenities in the area cost of living; distance from work people working only for money tend to become unhappy once the newness of the position is gone. however, salary is an important consideration. base your figure on research of the typical salary for that type of position in that job market. learn how to negotiate to get the best salary and benefits offer you can. nevertheless, being able to learn and get experience, liking your work and the people, and supporting the philosophy and goals of the organization are also important factors. respond to the offer by the date requested. if you need additional time to consider the offer, ask, but be reasonable in your request. once you have accepted the job offer, make the commitment to go to that organization. confirm your agreement in writing. see the section on letter writing.