values values identifying your personal values is an important part of a successful career plan. in this context, the word "value" refers to how you feel about the work itself and the contribution it makes to society. most people who pursue work that is congruent with their values feel satisfied and successful in their careers. work values can be divided into two functional categories. intrinsic values are those that relate to a specific interest in the activities of the work itself, or to the benefits that the work contributes to society. extrinsic values relate to the favourable conditions that accompany an occupational choice, such as physical setting, earning potential, and other external features. most people, in order to feel truly satisfied with their work, must find some personal intrinsic value in it. the following is a list of personal values that many people have identified as being important to them in their careers. to begin exploring your own personal work values, rate each value listed with the following scale and add other values you consider essential to your list. 1 - things i value very much 2 - things i value 3 - things i don't value very much help society do something which contributes to improving the world we live in help others be directly included in helping other people, either individually or in small groups public contact have a lot of day-to-day contact with the public work with others work as a team member toward common goals work alone do projects by myself, with limited contact with others competition engage in activities which pit my abilities against others make decisions have the power to decide courses of action and policies work under pressure work in situations where time pressure is prevalent influence people be in a position to influence the attitudes or opinions of other people knowledge engage in the pursuit of knowledge and understanding work mastery become an expert in whatever work i do artistic creativity engage in creative artistic expression general creativity have the opportunity to create new programs, materials, or organizational structures aesthetics participate in studying or appreciating the beauty of things, ideas, etc. supervision have a job in which i am directly responsible for the work of others change and variety have work activities which frequently change precision work work in situations where attention to detail and accuracy are very important stability have a work routine and job duties that are largely predictable security be assured of keeping my job and receiving satisfactory compensation recognition be publicly recognized for the high quality of my work fast pace work in circumstances where work must be done rapidly excitement experience a high degree of (or frequent) excitement in the course of my work adventure have work duties which require frequent risk-taking financial gain have a high likelihood of achieving very great monetary rewards for my work physical challenge do activities that use my physical capabilities independence be able to determine the nature of my work without significant direction from others moral fulfillment feel that my work contributes to a set of moral standards which i feel are very important community live where i can participate in community affairs time freedom be able to work according to my own schedule add others which are important to you. my 5 most essential values 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.