trends trends when making career decisions, it is important to remember that your choices must fit into the realities of the working world. however, it is possible to use those same trends to your advantage, by utilizing those aspects of your personality and experience which are most compatible with employment demands. labour market trends labour market trends are those which operate on a macro-scale and determine which employment fields will be predominant. examples include advertising, research and development, information systems management, and social work. by analyzing certain indices (in sources such as specialized books, business journals, government policies, even your daily paper and the internet), you can begin to discern patterns which you can extrapolate into future employment prospects. indices you can watch for include: demographics technology economic globalization domestic economic conditions and policies state of the environment. a change in any of these indices has the potential to create new career opportunities or to lead to the elimination of jobs. the impact of these trends is evident in the downsizing of the canadian manufacturing sector, the diversification of the service sector, and the growth of small business. it will be up to you to gain a basic understanding of these trends so that you can adjust your career preparation and take advantage of emerging possibilities. start your search for information in career services where there is an entire section devoted to future career and labour market trends, as well as canadian newspapers and business magazines. check out some of the internet sites as well. occupational trends occupational trends, which are more micro-oriented, are concerned with your role within a certain field. for example, within "advertising", you can be a full- or part-time employee of an advertising firm, you can be a freelancer or contractor, you can job-share, etc. changing economic conditions are a major determinant of occupational trends, with events like recessions and economic restructuring playing important roles. technological advances are also significant. one change due to the advent of high-tech tools has been the increased number of people telecommuting (working from home). therefore, by matching your strengths and interests with the needs of your field(s) of interest, you will be able to fulfill your career goals while filling a niche in the labour market. it is clear that both types of trends must be considered simultaneously if you are to make the most of your career. you are making a big investment in preparing for your career, so make sure your skills will be marketable in the future by keeping up with occupational and labour market trends. sample trends resources in career services beck, nuala. shifting gears: thriving in the new economy. toronto, on: harpercollins. 1992. bridges, william. job shift. reading, ma: addison-wesley. 1994. campbell, colin. where the jobs are. toronto, on: macfarlane walter & ross. 1994. feather, frank. canada’s best careers guide. toronto, on: warwick publishing. 1994. job futures, vol. 1 & 2. ottawa, on: canada communications group. 1996. kleiman, carol. 100 best jobs for the 1990's and beyond. chicago, il: dearborn financial. 1992. krannich, ronald l. and caryl rae krannich. the best jobs for the 1990's. manassas park, va: impact publications. 1993.