job/work interviews job/work interviews purpose the interview is a mutual exchange of information between an employer and a candidate for a position. the primary objectives are: to supply information about yourself that is not contained in your resume; to show that you understand yourself and have a sense of direction in your career. to enable the employer to evaluate your personality and attitudes in terms of the demands of the organization and the possible position. to enable you to gain information about the organization and the job which is not available through other sources. to give you and the employer an opportunity to discuss the desirability of further contact or an offer of employment. interview preparation knowledge of yourself to impress an employer you must be well prepared and understand the value of what you have to offer. be able to relate your assets to the position and the organization. to accomplish this you must know yourself. review your self assessment sheets and your preparing for the resume and job interview worksheet. review your resume and be prepared to answer questions about the contents. substantiate all points with information. rather than trying to determine only at what level you are currently functioning, some interviewers want to see how you have grown over time in areas related to their position(s), e.g., interpersonal/work skills, motivation. some will compel you to talk about your failures and mistakes to find out what you have learned or have since done differently. knowledge of company/organization you must be familiar with the position and the organization so that you can demonstrate how and why you will be an effective employee. try to find out as much as you can about the organization prior to your interview. ask the company to send you material, e.g., annual report, brochures, in-house newsletter or magazine. this knowledge will also help you to decide whether you want to be associated with a particular organization. review information in the section on researching employers. obtain information, if you can, on whom you will be meeting with and the schedule for the interview period. if you can find out about your interviewer(s), e.g., name, title, background, in advance, you will be able to commit their names to memory and use them during the interviews. your physical appearance your success or failure in the interview can depend on your appearance and the interviewer's first impression of you. if it is not good, it will be much harder during the rest of the interview to change the interviewer's mind. look neat, clean and well-groomed. select proper clothing for the type of organization interviewing you. if in doubt, be conservative. during the interview don't worry about being nervous during the interview—this is normal and will be expected. just remember, the interviewer wants to hire you if you have the right qualifications and interest in the position. many interviewers will begin the interview with some "small talk" to help you relax. this may seem irrelevant to the position, but you are still being evaluated. take these opening moments to show a great attitude, e.g., pleasure speaking with the interviewer, interesting facts about the organization which you found during your research. you may want to ask some questions about the organization, its products/services to hear the interviewer talk, to get a sense of energy level and pacing. the second phase of the interview consists of the interviewer asking you questions to try to determine your match to the specifications needed to do the work well. the most reliable way for an interviewer to project how you would perform in the future is to examine the past. therefore, many employers prepare some behaviour-based questions. which ones are asked depends on the work you are interviewing for. examples: tell me about a time when you had to go beyond what is ordinarily expected of an employee in order to get a job done. give me an example of an important goal you set and describe your success in reaching it. discuss occasions when you adapted to a wide variety of people and situations. describe a time when you had an angry customer on the telephone. by analyzing the questions asked of you, you will be able to find out more particulars about the job for which you have applied. what emphasis does the interviewer seem to be placing on which skills, knowledge, personality traits and attitudes. that insight can help you focus your answers more easily to the employer’s position. always relate your answers to your future responsibilities and the organization's policies. give concrete examples from your past activities as illustrations of your qualifications. never answer with a simple "yes" or "no". substantiate your answers whenever possible. your points must be: clear relevant adequate to enable the employer to understand what you are trying to say to enable the employer to determine you strengths for that particular job to enable the employer to have sufficient information to make a good decision in your answers, if you adopt a model similar to the following, the interviewer should ultimately be able to determine: can you do the job? will you do the job? do you fit in? selling your benefits/competitive advantage (approximately 90 seconds) skill/knowledge/trait statement 70 seconds what, who, when where, why, how the successful outcome benefits transferable to interviewer’s organization 20 seconds how the above model will help you organize your answers to behaviour-based questions. for example, in response to the query, "what experience do you have organizing projects?", you would determine that the qualification being evaluated is organizational skills. your skill/knowledge/trait statement could be, "i have developed excellent organizational skills by working on two major projects. the one i would like to tell you about came to a successful conclusion six months ago." (whatever statement you make must be true! don’t lie or embellish.) the illustration you would choose to confirm your statement would be a project that required similar competency to the typical project that the prospective employer would want you to organize. describe the what, who, when, where, why, how, and talk about the successful outcome or what you learned from the experience. as you tell the story, the employer can see or live through the action with you. the next step is the one that most candidates for a position do not do. tell the interviewer what benefits or competitive advantage you can bring because of that experience. "as part of the team being formed, i would be able to co-ordinate ...." prior knowledge of possible questions the employer may ask enables you to prepare points to include in your answers, thus allowing you to relax and be yourself. think about why the question is being asked. what does the employer really want to know? following are some typical questions. watch for behaviour-based questions! tell me about yourself. what are your short-term goals? what about in 2 and 5 years from now? what is your own vision/mission statement? what do you think you will be looking for in the job following this position? why do you feel you will be successful in this work? what other types of jobs are you looking for in addition to this one? what supervisory or leadership roles have you had? what experience have you had working on a team? what have been your most satisfying/disappointing experiences? what are your strengths/weaknesses? what kinds of problems do you handle the best? how do you reduce stress and try to achieve balance in your life? how did you handle a request to do something contrary to your moral code or business ethics? what was the result the last time you tried to sell your idea to others? why did you apply to our organization and what do you know about us? what do you think are advantages/disadvantages of joining our organization? what is the most important thing you are looking for in an employer? what were some of the common characteristics of your past supervisors? what characteristics do you think a person would need to have to work effectively in our company with its policies of staying ahead of the competition? what courses did you like best/least? why? what did you learn or gain from your part-time/summer/co-op/internship experiences? what are your plans for further studies? why are your grades low? how do you spend your spare time? if i asked your friends to describe you, what do you think they would say? what frustrates you the most? when were you last angry at work and what was the outcome? how did you handle the time when you had to work with someone you disliked? what things could you do to increase your overall effectiveness? what was the toughest decision you had to make in the last year? why was it difficult? why haven’t you found a job yet? you don’t seem to have any experience in ___ (e.g., sales, fundraising, bookkeeping), do you? why should i hire you? to supplement information obtained prior to the interview, you need to ask additional questions during the interview. the questions, however, should be pertinent to the position and show your enthusiasm and knowledge. by asking intelligent, well-thought-out questions, you show the employer you are serious about the organization and need more information. it also indicates to the recruiter that you have done your homework. examples are: do you have a copy of the detailed job description? what do you see as the priorities for someone in this position? would you be able to describe a typical day on the job? what would be a typical first-year assignment? what training programs do you have available for your employees? what level of responsibility could i expect in this position? what qualities do you look for in new employees? is there a typical career path for a person in this position? how are employees evaluated and promoted? what is a realistic timeframe for promotion? does the company have a promotion-from-within policy? what are the company's plans for the future? what do you see as the greatest threat to the organization? what/where are the greatest opportunities for the organization how would you describe your organization's management style and working environment? what do you like most about your organization? why is this position available? (is it a new job or where did the former occupant go?) i feel confident that i would be able to do your job well, but do you have any doubts about my suitability? notes for questions i would like to ask verbal/non-verbal communication acknowledge introductions with a smile and a firm handshake. maintain good eye contact and smile when appropriate. be enthusiastic and responsive. radiate energy. how are you going to demonstrate your enthusiasm if you tend to be a quiet person? as you talk about your past and present activities in answer to questions, your passion and energy can be communicated both through the words of your stories and your body language (e.g., sparkling eyes and tone of voice). sit comfortably, without slouching. don't put anything on your lap or in your hands as it will restrict your natural body movement and you may be tempted to "play" with it. keep your clipboard, note pad, briefcase, or portfolio on the floor beside your chair for easy retrieval when necessary. respond to questions specifically and concisely but give sufficient details to enable the interviewer to evaluate your credentials. interviewers become frustrated when they have to listen to long rambling answers. think before you speak. it is quite acceptable to pause before talking in order to organize your thoughts, but think quietly. avoid verbal fillers such as um, ah, you know, etc., or repeating the question in order to provide thinking time. use business language. avoid slang. speak clearly. prepare in advance to talk about any topic that you are concerned or feel uncomfortable about. if there is something that you don’t want an interviewer to inquire about, you can be sure that somehow the interviewer will sense it, and ask. practise your answer out loud often enough to feel confident when saying it. maintain poise and self control. maybe you need to think about that difficult issue as a learning opportunity which has made you a better person. answer questions truthfully. if you are playing a game in order to get hired, you will be found out once you are on the job. types of interviews one-on-one the most common interview format is one interviewer speaking with one candidate. team/board interview with two or more persons the key is good eye-to-eye contact with the person who asks you the question, but remember to look at the other persons present periodically in order to include them in your answer. structured interview all candidates are asked the same questions for the employer's ease in evaluating applicants. if there is important information that you have not conveyed by the end of the interview, when asked if you have any questions or anything to add, present your additional qualifications. usually the interviewer will make written notes of your answers. unstructured interview you have a better opportunity to convey information as there is no set agenda for questions by the interviewer. however, you need to be well prepared and know the points you want to make. telephone interview because of the high cost of paying travel expenses for candidates to the employer's location, some first interviews are being conducted over the phone. if the call surprises you and you are not ready for an interview, ask the person to call back in 15 minutes, or arrange another time which will be mutually convenient. you need time to refresh your memory on the organization and what points about yourself you want to make. all points about good interview skills still apply. you just do not have to dress for the occasion. however, you may find that dressing up may help you perform better. keep your resume and your list of questions to ask in front of you. have a pen and paper available to note any comments or questions you may have during the interview. computer interviews because of the number of qualified applicants available for positions, you may find that your first interview will be with a computer. the purpose of this screening is to compare your answers to the information on your resume. be just as diligent with your answers as you would with a human interviewer. you don’t want the computer to find reasons to screen you out. video conferencing computer technology through on-line interview rooms allows companies to prescreen more candidates from farther afield than has been possible through visits to colleges and universities in the past. the pool of applicants then invited to the company for personal interviews can be more comprehensive. recruiters conduct live, face-to-face interviews with job applicants via personal computers equipped with cameras and speakers. use the same strategies you would if you were meeting in person, knee-to-knee. clothing, body language, and dialogue do not differ. your agenda is to be offered an invitation to meet personally for a second interview at the company. second interview - plant/office visit except for short-term positions, e.g., co-op, a candidate being seriously considered by a prospective employer will be invited to visit the organization at one of its locations. one purpose is to provide you with an opportunity to meet other staff. the second is to give more people an opportunity to interview you at greater depth to determine whether a good match is developing. the visit can take an entire day, sometimes more. when an organization offers to pay your expenses to travel to the interview, be prudent in submitting costs. your choice of moderate rather than luxurious accommodation, food, transportation, etc. will reflect your good judgement. ending the interview when it appears that the interviewer is about to end the interview, there are certain points you should make sure you have covered before you leave the room: be aware of the interview process yet to come before a candidate is selected for the job (e.g., another interview in same/other location, meetings with other individuals in organization, etc.) ask the interviewer when you can expect to hear about a decision or ask when you should make an inquiry as a follow-up. express your interest in the position and thank the interviewer for interviewing you. ask for a business card or ensure that you have the interviewer's name, title, address so that you can send a thank-you letter (except for job interviews through co-op scheduling). make sure your letter arrives within 24 hours of the interview. employer evaluation employers usually have a formal rating sheet with predetermined areas such as: neat and clean overall appearance/poise/communicative skills academic/work achievements (learning ability, standards of excellence) special skills (technical, languages, creativity, management, analytic, negotiation) personal characteristics (team player, enthusiasm, dependability, emotional stability, flexibility) self assessment, goals/ambitions leisure-time activities, balance in life reaction to job/organization potential evaluating your performance evaluate how well you did after each interview. ask yourself: what points did i make that seemed to interest the employer? did i present my qualifications in the best manner possible, giving appropriate examples as evidence? did i pass up opportunities to sell myself, to demonstrate the work i do, and to show how profitably i could do it for both the organization and myself? did i talk too much? too little? was i too tense? passive? aggressive? did i find out enough about the employer and the job to help in making a knowledgeable decision? changes i would like to make for my next interview: tips get a good night’s sleep before your interview. believe in yourself! be punctual. arrive at least 15 minutes early to allow yourself time to collect your thoughts. take the opportunity to observe the working environment. keep your eyes and ears open. be friendly with everyone. try to get the interviewer to describe the position and duties to you early in the interview so that you can relate your background and skills to the particular position. your responsibility is to convince the employer that you are the best person for the job. since the interviewer may not draw it out of you, remember the points which are important about your qualifications. give descriptive examples or proof whenever you can throughout the interview. try to paint a visual picture that the employer will remember. the true stories you tell about yourself will differentiate you from the other 10 to 20 applicants. radiate genuine enthusiasm. watch the interviewer for clues on how the interview is progressing. is the interviewer's face or body language telling you that your answers are too long, not detailed enough, too boring, etc.? if in doubt, ask the interviewer if more details are needed. listen carefully to the question and the way it is phrased. if it can be interpreted in more than one way, and if you are unsure what the interviewer really wants you to discuss, ask for clarification. if the interviewer becomes silent, look for the reason. has the person momentarily run out of questions? is the person testing you to see how comfortable you are with silence? is the interviewer finding your answers too brief and waiting for you to elaborate more in order to get a better sense of who you are? if the interviewer outlines a hypothetical situation and asks you what you would do if you found yourself in those circumstances, imagine yourself in that situation. give the best answer you can if it is a situation which you have not already experienced and successfully dealt with. in many instances, the interviewer is more interested in finding out how you would react under those circumstances, and in your thinking/analytical process than in your final answer. in your analysis, think about which are the most important facts. watch for a "red herring". do you need to get additional information from someone else in the scenario before you could make a decision? do you want the interviewer to supply more detail for clarification on a key point? when the interviewer asks about your weaknesses, choose something work-related, but not so serious as to disqualify you. briefly mention one, always ending on a positive note. show what you have learned from the experience or what you are doing to change. if pressed for more than one weakness, have another one or two ready to discuss. also, if asked about any negative employment experience (e.g., being fired, trouble with supervisor), don't criticize past employers. briefly acknowledge any difficulty and say what you have learned or discuss the positive outcome of the situation. by looking so carefully at weaknesses or negatives, an employer is trying to determine where you might have problems on the job. the bottom line for some positions may be: "let’s hire the candidate who will do the work adequately while having the fewest serious shortcomings". except for co-op scheduled interviews, don't inquire about salary, bonuses, benefits in the initial interview. if you are pressed to give a salary expectation, turn it around to the interviewer and ask what the organization would ordinarily pay a person with your credentials. if you are still pressed, know what salary range would apply to that type of job in that geographic location. you could try to obtain this information by speaking to people in the field prior to your interview. good salary information is also available on the internet. practise in a mock interview with another person. check for quality of information in your answers, and the positive, non-verbal reinforcement of your words. by speaking out loud you can "hear" your answers to ensure you cover the topic well. don't practise so much though that you lose your spontaneity and your answers sound rehearsed. if you do not receive a job offer (especially if you felt the "fit" was very good), you may want to contact the interviewer to get feedback on your performance. it could be (1) they hired someone with better qualifications. or (2) you didn’t adequately present your qualifications, thereby causing an incorrect assessment of your capability. if the reason is (1), keep going—you’ll find the right match! if (2), make changes in your next interview! your rights in the interview the ontario human rights commission (ohrc) publishes a chart that illustrates the type of questions that are appropriate or inappropriate in employment interviews. following are the categories that have restrictions on what can be legally asked: birthplace, ancestry, ethnic origin, place of origin sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family status age race, colour religion, creed citizenship education record of offences handicap references and membership in organizations although it is ultimately the responsibility of the interviewer to know the law, this may not always be the case. it is to your advantage to be informed on the subject. for information, contact the ohrc. you've done the reading and know your rights as they pertain to the interview. now you're in the middle of one and have just been asked what is clearly an illegal question. what should you do? there is no clear-cut answer. much depends on you. here are some ideas: in some cases, you may be able to answer the "hidden" question. try to think of what information the employer is trying to elicit. example: "do you have or plan to have children?" may be a disguise for "are you going to be able to work overtime?" or "will you be requesting time off for school holidays/events?" in this example, your answer should convey your willingness to work overtime as required or make alternate child care arrangements. you may elect to say "why do you ask?" or "would you explain how this point is connected to the qualifications for this job?" this may cause the employer to reconsider and/or clarify the question. this may offend some employers, but probably not the majority. if you feel that you should not answer the question (you shouldn't have to after all) or that you are not interested in working for the company, you may state, "i don't feel obligated to answer that" or "that question is inappropriate". if you choose this option, you will either enlighten (the employer may not realize it is illegal and will be happy that you pointed it out) or offend (the employer may not consider you for the position). however you handle the situation, you do have the right to call the ohrc if you feel that you might have been discriminated against during an interview. tell them what happened and they will advise you on how to proceed. ombudsperson, university of waterloo if you feel you have been discriminated against in any way during a job interview either within or outside of the university, you may approach the ombudsperson regarding the matter. you will be referred to a lawyer outside of the university if the matter cannot be handled by the university itself. sample interview skills resources in career services businessweek careers. successful interviewing. mcgraw hill productions. 1987. (video) corcodilos, nicholas a. the new interview instruction book. lebanon, nj: north bridge press. 1994. fry, ron. 101 great answers to the toughest interview questions. hawthorne, nj: careers press. 1994. jist works inc. effective answers to interview questions. indianapolis, in: jist works inc. 1989. leeds, dorothy. smart questions: interview your way to job success. new york, ny: harper collins. 1993. krannich, ronald l. and caryl rae krannich. dynamite answers to interview questions. woodbridge, va: impact publications. 1992. yate, martin. knock 'em dead with great answers to tough interview questions. holbrook, ma: bob adams, inc. 1992. as was mentioned earlier, it is important to keep good records of your job search activities and your contacts with other people. an example format is provided for you. employer contact record employer research person, title organization address, phone initial contact date employer response date my follow-up date job interview notes job offer date career services walk-in job title thank-you letter sent accepted campus/public libraries, internet phone date-time rejected literature from employer letter interviewer networking other location employer research person, title organization address, phone initial contact date employer response date my follow-up date job interview notes job offer date career services walk-in job title thank-you letter sent accepted campus/public libraries, internet phone date-time rejected literature from employer letter interviewer networking other location