curriculum vitae back to home page curriculum vitae what is a curriculum vitae? a presentation of credentials for a teaching/research position in a university or an equivalent-type research institute. a resume(two page= s maximum) is prepared for employers outside the academic environment. an indispensable job hunting tool that represents an objective, factual, personal history of you - an advertisement designed to market you by highlighting your abilities and future potential. a summary of your career aspirations, educational background, employment experience, achievements, and interests. assessing your qualifications preparing a proper c.v. requires a complete assessment of yourself in an organized way. anyone advertising a product must know that product, and the product here is "you". major sections of a curriculum vitae curriculum vitae (optional at top of page) name (no heading necessary) address and telephone/fax number (or addresses such as home, business, e mail) (no heading necessary when listing only one address) citizenship languages spoken, read, written (if relevant) certification or licence status with numbers and dates issued (if relevant) education include all information on bachelor, master, ph.d., postdoctoral or other relevant studies, in reverse chronological order, i.e., most recent first. include degree awarded or anticipated, date, name of institution, location, discipline/school. show areas of specialty by topic, with thesis/dissertation titles and advisors' names, and courses of special interest, if helpful. list a qualifying year for a program of studies as a separate entry, in the same format as your other degrees, e.g., master of arts (qualifying year), 199-. academic and professional interests provide a brief summary of your interests and areas of expertise which could be called upon both inside and outside of your institution. list in point form, beginning with a general or broad spectrum and ending with the more specific areas. more details can be included in your letter. employment describe your work experience relating to the job you are seeking, e.g., graduate research, internships, assistantships, teaching, field placements, consulting, administration, management in both the public and private sectors. create separate sections to highlight details: teaching - class size, undergrad/graduate levels, course preparation, 		marking research - activities, grants and contracts, with the dollar value optional supervision - sole supervision of students or supervision committees to include dissertations and theses. organize jobs in reverse chronological order within each section, i.e., most recent first. include beginning and terminating dates, job title, name of company or organization, and location. start points with action verbs; do not write in complete sentences or paragraphs. list accomplishments and tasks performed. show your skills and abilities. professional affiliations include current memberships. mention offices held, significant appointments, with dates. awards, scholarships, fellowships, prizes, grants include both academic	and professional. state name of honour, granting institution or agency, and date. explain acronyms; the meaning of the recognition may not be clear, especially those awarded by other countries. publications presentations inventions/patents include all, most recent first, in correct bibliographic format so that the reader can check details. include relevant information such as author(s), title, publisher, place of publication, name of periodical, volume, issue number, date, page(s). show both independent and collaborative work (if applicable). create separate sections with headings for a lengthy publications list, placing sections in appropriate order: authored or co-authored books, book chapters, monographs refereed, peer reviewed: journals, full papers or letters conference papers, abstracts or posters invited, non-refereed book reviews work in press, work submitted, work in preparation (use separate headings) creative writing outside of one's professional field (if relevant) other scholarship available for critical appraisal, e.g., buildings, plans, patents. service university - department, faculty, and university responsibilities, including committee work professional - referee or reviewing/editing functions for journals, granting agencies. community outreach - significant volunteer activities showing leadership or important service. hobbies, interests, leisure activities, travel show those with relevance to academic life (e.g., magician with expertise to use as a teaching tool), or, if you wish, include a broader range of activities, such as athletic, social, intellectual, cultural, if applicants in your field traditionally include this information. travel to participate in conferences and symposia should be a separate heading. references supply the name, address, telephone/fax number of 3 (or more) individuals who can comment on your fit to the institution where you are applying. choose your referees wisely, i.e., persons who know you and your work well, referees with high external visibility. be sure to ask their permission before submitting their names. whenever you provide reference information to an institution, advise your referees that they may be getting a request and keep them up-to-date on your professional activities. select individuals who collectively can speak well on your behalf from various perspectives: one may be able to give a general overview and others from the specific aspects required by the position. of special interest will be your referees' comments about your unique experiences (from personal, academic, or work experience points of view, your strengths, and your weaknesses (with the extenuating circumstances explained). tell your referees what particular topics they need to discuss so that their letters can be tailored to the positions you are seeking. if the advertisement requests that reference letters be sent immediately, provide sufficient information to your referees and tactfully follow up to ensure that the letters have been mailed well in time. notes on writing a curriculum vitae place sections in the order of importance of the information about you. if you are not sure about the traditional formatting for c.v.s in your field, check with your supervisor or department chair. also, include specific sections which are relevant to your field, e.g., computer proficiency, scientific instrumentation, etc. include sufficient, well-written detail about yourself to enable a good assessment of your qualifications for the position: 2 to 4 pages for a young professional 4 to 7 pages for a person with more experience 10 pages as a maximum. omit reference to marital status, children, health, spouse's work, religious affiliation. do not include as headings, words such as "personal information", "name", "address". omit negative words or information. ensure that you use correct spelling and grammar. take care to produce an excellent physical product with appropriate font sizes, paper stock and good laser printing. update the information in your c.v. before sending. it is not necessary to include the date of preparation; however, if you think it would be helpful to you or to those receiving your c.v., add the date at the top of the first page. researching the job before applying for a position, determine your fit to the area where the job vacancy occurs. it would be helpful if you could do some preliminary research about the department and institution prior to sending your application so that you do not put emphasis in the wrong place. are teaching and research of equal importance? what other duties are expected? prior to arriving for an interview for that position, it is essential to find out as much as you can so that you will be able to present your credentials as effectively as possible. cover or broadcast letters how can you differentiate yourself from the many good applicants applying for the position? what points will draw attention to you as a worthwhile candidate to interview? there is a fine line between projecting yourself positively and too aggressively, however, resulting in overkill and a concern about your ability to fit into the department. personalize your letter by addressing it to the chair of the department, with the person's name correctly spelled. a form letter is less well received, and you may therefore need to make a decision on the quantity vs. the quality of your letters. ensure the highest quality of information possible in the letter accompanying your c.v. include a mission statement about your objective in clear, unambiguous points. discuss your strengths and area of specialization. observe the rules of good writing to help the reader to ascertain your credentials quickly. write shor=04=d8s=10=00=00=00=00=00=00= =d0=dd=04=be=03@h a clear op=04=82=cd-g sentence to define the topic of the paragraph and highlight relevant, important information. use correct spelling and grammar. in addition to talking about your current research, include a one-paragraph or one page, personalized (not vague or generic), concise, coherent statement about your future research interests or long-term goals so that your potential can be determined. it is especially important to make that connection when you are applying for a job which is somewhat different from what you are currently doing. it could also be to your advantage to mention the courses/general areas you would like to teach. elaborate on your experience in seminars, lectures and talks. include details such as course name (and description if necessary) and number of students. add information on what you feel are other strengths, such as enjoyment in working with groups, obtaining funding for projects, action-oriented research. your potential for service (the third part of the triumvirate of research, teaching and service) and your collegiality can more easily be evaluated by including details of your work with clubs, organizations and committees, e.g., organizing graduate student seminars or journal club. when you are applying to an advertised position or when you are writing to an institution you are very interested in to inquire about possible openings, you may wish to include with your letter a reprint of 2 or 3 papers published or presented at a convention to provide more information about your capabilities. if you are a new graduate, you may also want to enclose a photocopy of your transcript(s). the individuals reviewing your application are interested in continuity. if you have unexplained gaps in your c.v., discuss them in your letter, e.g., the ten years it took to finish your ph.d. after completing your master's degree. if you prefer, you could ask one of your referees to explain the situation in his/her letter of recommendation. however, patch up the holes as well as you can to make a good presentation. should you have a major health-related issue which should be introduced at the time you send in your application, discuss the situation briefly in your letter and mention what has to be done in the position to overcome the difficulty, or you may prefer to have one of your referees talk about it on your behalf. should you be currently employed and want to apply confidentially for another position, it is not necessary to tell your supervisor initially. the three referees you select can include trusted colleagues from your organization or individuals from other institutions who know you and your work well. in your letter, you could include a note that when the institution is serious about you and wishes to obtain a reference from your supervisor, you would then be prepared to supply the information. it may be to your advantage, if you are female, to indicate that fact if your first name cannot easily be identified by the reader. you could add miss, mrs. or ms. in brackets before your name is typed at the end of your letter. have your application package reviewed by others to check for relevance and quality of presentation. selection process because of the expense usually incurred when bringing in candidates for an interview, you may find an institution with an agenda as follows: the receipt of your application may be acknowledged by a note which may also inform you of the progress and, if necessary, request information not included in your package. one person or several individuals will screen all applications with a few (10 - 12) promising candidates selected, and the documentation from the others filed in the "not-of-interest-at-this time" category. if letters of reference have not already been sent by their referees, the promising applicants may be told to have their referees contact the hiring institution, or the referees may be notified directly by telephone or letter. if the person hiring for the position personally knows someone at the candidate's institution, that person may also be contacted. to permit an easier check of your teaching ability if you are applying for your first full-time position after graduation, you may wish to include in your c.v. the name of the instructor(s)/co-ordinator(s) for whom you taught the courses listed in your c.v. after hearing from the referees, 3 to 6 people are selected and invited for an interview. it is advisable to send as complete an application package as possible as early as you can as some invitations to interview may be given before the advertised closing date. the interview day(s) may comprise: a tour of the institution appointments with one or more of - department chair, individual faculty members, department search committee, dean of faculty one or more talks, such as a talk to the department based on your research where you can choose your own topic, and a lecture to a large introductory level class on a predetermined topic, so that the relevance of your background and your ability to express ideas can be determined "bear pit" session with students usually at the graduate level opportunity for informal discussion on a drop-in basis social activities. remember, at all times you are being evaluated. to be able to present yourself as well as you can, it may be helpful to find out what is expected and what the evaluation criteria are, e.g., communication skills and comfort level in talking with groups. ask the person setting up your schedule questions on the background of those attending talks. such information will enable you to determine how familiar they may be with your technical data. it may take 1 to 2 months before a decision is made, particularly if you are one of the first candidates interviewed. a job offer will be extended to the person selected. graduating ph.d. applicants who are viewed as strong candidates may be offered postdoctoral rather than tenure-tract positions. it is helpful to know that most applicants are rejected because their interests do not seem to match the department's interests or someone else is viewed as a stronger candidate. addendum a viewpoint was presented by prof. keith thomas in his article entitled, "academics and the sorcerer's apprentice". two paragraphs are quoted with the author's permission. thirty years ago and more, the people who hired new faculty members usually looked for certain academic qualities. a command of the subject was required, as witnessed by the candidates' performance as students at university and by their publications, lectures, and presenting of papers. in particular, perception and discernment were looked for, especially the ability to penetrate to the heart of a question and to perceive the relations of the parts to the whole. at the same time a sense of proportion was valued, the ability to assess correctly how important each part is (and not only in what is being studied, but also in the activities of people in a university). industry, of course, was cherished, as were eagerness to explore the unexplored and the deftness and skill needed to find a way where no one had gone before. equally valued as an alternative was the ability to perceive and demonstrate error in what had been traditionally accepted as truth. success in communication was likewise looked for, whether it was achieved through clarity of expression or evocativeness of style. the people hiring looked for the ability to arouse and maintain interest, even enthusiasm, for the subject and for the parts of the discipline being examined. sensitivity to nuance, both in the texts examined and in the students taught, was also required, as was a concern that students arrive at an understanding and appreciation of their subject suitable to their level of progress in the discipline. likewise required were fairness and evenhandedness in dealing with works by competing scholars and critics and in dealing with students. equally looked for was an understanding of the kinds of difficulties students may encounter, and so was the encouraging of perseverance and the giving of one's best effort. back to home page for comments and suggestions, please feel free to email kerry mahoney, supervisor, career resource centre.