interests interests vocational interests each person has developed personal preferences for certain types of activities and environments. most people who enjoy their work have some intrinsic interest in the activities with which they are connected. the six general areas of vocational interest developed by psychologist john holland are described below. think about your past experiences and your current activities. then rank these work environments from (1) to (6), from the one which best describes you (1), to the one which least describes you (6). realistic for people who like activities that are practical and concrete. they like to work outdoors and to work with tools and machines using their physical skills. they often seek work relating to nature and the outdoors, mechanics, construction or military service. investigative for people who enjoy scientific and intellectual pursuits. they enjoy gathering information, uncovering new facts or theories and analyzing and interpreting data. they often seek work relating to academic research, medical facilities, or computer-related industries. artistic for people who value aesthetic qualities and like opportunities for self-expression. they prefer unstructured and flexible environments. they often seek work relating to art, music, drama, writing or in libraries or museums. social for people who enjoy working with people-to inform, help, train or develop them in some way. they enjoy working in groups, sharing responsibilities and are good communicators. they like to solve problems through discussions of feelings and interactions with others. they often seek work relating to teaching, counselling or recreation. enterprising for people who enjoy influencing, leading or managing others for organizational goals or for economic success. they enjoy persuading others to their viewpoint and prefer social tasks where they can assume leadership. they often seek work relating to business management, sales or politics. conventional for people who enjoy systematic activities requiring attention to accuracy and detail, often associated with office work. they enjoy working for large organizations and are comfortable with an established chain of command. they often seek work relating to financial institutions, accounting firms, or other large businesses. further information about john holland's theory of vocational choices is available in career services. you may also arrange to complete an assessment of your personal pattern of interests using the strong interest inventory. contact counselling services, nh 2080, ext. 2655, for further information. "i want to work with people" many individuals say that working with people must be an important part of any career they pursue. there are many different aspects to the concept of "working with people". the exercise below is designed to help you focus on those which are important to you. insert an x to note those ways which appeal to you. add to the list others which are important to you. then indicate the three ways of working with people that you would most enjoy and be proficient at, and the three you would least enjoy. influence the attitudes, ideas of others gather information through direct contact with people help people with personal problems instruct other people in various tasks or skills supervise and be responsible for the work of others consult or advise others (even though not directly responsible for them) confront others, present them with difficult decisions investigate people by obtaining information about them provide service to others: giving information, performing physical or highly technical tasks mediate between contending parties organize others, bring people together in co-operative efforts make decisions about others entertain or perform for enjoyment understand people and study their behaviour enjoy most 1. 2. 3. enjoy least 1. 2. 3. i want to work with information the present time is called the "information age". most jobs require information retrieval and usage. many occupations demand the development of new information. using information can take many forms. you can analyze, maintain and explain data. you can interpret ideas. you can learn facts and prepare reports. put an x on those ways that you would like to use information. add other ways. develop and discuss ideas and theories make decisions based on definite rules and measurements explain/interpret ideas and concepts use materials/equipment in work, e.g., computers, wall charts, overhead projectors, blueprints, etc. work with survey data or other information on public opinion conduct investigations, research work with documents and records work environment preferences satisfaction with your job often comes from a compatibility of other factors meeting your needs. in the following exercise, look at the elements of lifestyle in a geographic area. location: e.g., rural, small town, large metropolitan centre, climate, safety/security of neighbourhood accommodation/amenities: e.g., close to work, family, sports complex, continuing education programs other interests: e.g., starting own business, opportunity for civic/volunteer work describe your preferences for the job and organization, e.g., size of organization, amount of bureaucracy, challenge, responsibility, shift work, travel on job, prestigious job, nature of physical surroundings, amount of personal work space and equipment provided, training/personal development programs, feedback from supervisors, contact with co-workers, financial compensation, no/minimal relocation, type of technology in use, dress code, etc.