skills & achievements skills & achievements skill is defined as the ability to do something well, especially as a result of experience. most skills are transferable to other work settings and can be grouped in many ways. one way is to show functional skills of working with people, data or information, and things or objects. another way is to look at intellectual, aptitudinal, creative, leadership and problem-solving skills. employers are interested in knowing which skills you can bring to their organization. examine your jobs, both paid and unpaid, as well as your academic and personal activities to determine your skills. you also may wish to review the skills as action verbs in the resume writing section. do not underestimate the skills obtained in a "liberal" education. examples: oral/written communication through essay and report writing, presentations, and seminars; organization of time by having to meet deadlines and of ideas in order to present material logically; research by searching and locating information; problem-solving by analyzing and finding alternate solutions to a problem. for the exercise in this section, organize your skills into the following three groups. the first group will be specialized skills required in a particular job, e.g., analyzing statistics, debugging computer programs, designing machinery, refereeing sports, repairing equipment, appraising fitness levels. the second group will comprise your communication/interpersonal skills, e.g., writing, mediating, training, liaising, hosting, motivating. the third group will include those general skills needed in most jobs, e.g., initiating, improving, resolving, compiling, organizing, scheduling. choose 6 skills for each category. put an x in the column if you would like to use that skill in future work (l) and if you currently have a sufficient level of proficiency (p) for employment. specialized communication/ interpersonal general my skills l p my skills l p my skills l p select the 5 skills you most want to use from the 18 you listed above. give a good example of the circumstances when you used each skill and the outcome of your action. 1. skill: example: 2. skill: example: 3. skill: example: 4. skill: example: 5. skill: example: an important key to a future direction often lies in your past experiences. it is especially important to recognize positive experiences or accomplishments which you have already achieved. they are the ones most likely to suggest vocational areas that you may wish to pursue in the future. they are also the ones that employers are interested in hearing about. life experience profile use this page to compile a list of your previous experiences. include previous employment, volunteer and academic experiences, significant recreational activities, or other important roles you have played. examples: trainer of new staff at chicken emporium, volunteer fundraiser for helping children agency, leader of school study group in second year, contributor to school newspaper, creator of project for science display, roadside monitor for 10k race, organizer of parents' 25th anniversary party, member of church choir on three-week concert tour of europe, prizewinner in math contest. then, answer the following questions about each of these experiences. 1. what did i do? 2. what did i learn? 3. what did i enjoy? 4. what did i dislike? 5. what did i accomplish? 6. what did others commend me for? a list of my life experiences personal achievements the most important items on your experience profile are those which you enjoyed and in which you achieved success. review your life experience profile and summarize your personal accomplishments on this page. these reveal areas of personal strength that are important to consider when you are developing your vocational direction. this list will also provide a useful reminder of those things that you will likely want to highlight during your job interview. my personal achievements