student career assistant student career assistant program please read the following descriptions and consider applying to be a student career assistant, a student career information assistant, or a student marketing assistant. application information follows the position descriptions. these positions are for fall 2001, winter 2002 and spring 2002. student career information assistant: objectives to provide information to the users of the career resource centre and to assist them with education and career-related concerns. benefits acquisition of valuable knowledge about educational programs, career planning and job search strategies enhancement of communication, interpersonal and organizational skills (transferrable skills which are sought by many employers) satisfaction from helping others duties and responsibilities the student career information assistant is a volunteer position which requires a minimum of four (4) hours commitment per week over an eight (8) month term. (in order to accommodate both regular and co-op students, the terms need not be consecutive). specific tasks include: assist users of the career resource centre, in person or by phone, in finding information to make education and career plans, research employers and source employment opportunities using comprehensive knowledge of the materials in the centre and effective interpersonal and advisory skills initiate projects to enhance the centre's resources and services to clients maintain and update a variety of career and educational materials to ensure currency and integrity of resources register students and alumni for career services workshops and book resume critiquing appointments participate in intensive training program and attend career services workshops and ongoing meetings qualifications the student career information assistant must have strong communication, interpersonal, client service and organizational skills. also highly desirable are initiative and creativity. experience in a helping role is an asset. student career assistant: objectives to provide resume and cover letter advice to students and alumni via individual appointments. benefits acquisition of valuable knowledge about career planning and job search strategies enhancement of communication, interpersonal and organizational skills (transferrable skills which are sought by many employers) satisfaction from helping others duties and responsibilities the student career assistant is a volunteer position which requires a minimum of four (4) hours commitment per week over an eight (8) month term. (in order to accommodate both regular and co-op students, the terms need not be consecutive). specific tasks include: conduct one (1) hour individual resume and cover letter critiquing appointments with university of waterloo students and alumni when appointment hour is not scheduled, assist users of the career resource centre, in person or by phone, in finding information to make education and career plans, research employers and source employment opportunities using comprehensive knowledge of the materials in the centre and effective interpersonal and advisory skills carry out other projects of inerest participate in intensive training program and attend career services workshops and ongoing meetings qualifications the student career assistant must have strong communication, interpersonal, client service and organizational skills. also highly desirable are initiative and creativity. experience in a helping role is an asset. student marketing assistant: objectives to promote awareness of career services to the university of waterloo community. benefits sharpened marketing knowledge and skills through involvement in various promotional projects improved public speaking skills through presentations to various groups enhancement of communication, interpersonal and organizational skills (transferrable skills which are sought by many employers) duties and responsibilities the student marketing assistant is a volunteer position which requires a minimum of minimum of four (4) hours commitment per week over an eight (8) month term. (in order to accommodate both regular and co-op students, the terms need not be consecutive). specific tasks include: initiate a variety of projects designed to promote the services and resources of career services on campus maintain career services bulletin boards across campus make in-class announcements regarding career services events and services write articles on career services events and services for submission to campus newspapers qualifications the student marketing assistant must possess high creativity, initiative, and strong oral and written communication skills. please direct any questions to jayne hayden in needles hall, room 1115, ext. 3001, jayne hayden student career assistant application (please print and fill out) name: i.d. #: local address: local phone #: permanent address: permanent phone #: faculty & program: co-op or regular? (please circle) terms on campus (please circle): fall 01, winter 02, spring 02 position applying for (please inidicate your order of preference*): student career information assistant student career assistant student marketing assistant *please note that every effort will be made to accommodate your preferences; however, the number and nature of applications received may determine availability 1. please identify what you feel are common student needs in regards to career planning and job search. please submit (career resource centre, nh 1115) this form together with your resume and cover letter stating your reasons for applying and what benefits you would bring to the program. last updated: february 28, 2001 ejhayden@admmail.uwaterloo.ca