order form career services looking for a summer, part-time or ontario work placement position? employment network is a weekly job listing available year-round to all students. summer, part-time and ontario work placement positions received by career services are available on-line to regular students. (summer positions may also include work placement positions for that term, as well as internship programs). how to view the employment network: summer, part-time and ontario work placement positions - you must register. use the on-line access system to view job opportunities. review the employment network and choose positions in which you are interested. prepare your package according to the employer’s instructions (i.e. resume, cover letter, transcript). application forms normally, the employer will request a resume package as indicated previously. summer positions will quite often require you to complete an application form. application forms are available in  career services, nh 1115. each job description will indicate what and how to submit. please adhere to application deadlines and any specific instructions. regular students are not normally scheduled for interviews though cecs, but will be contacted by the employer for this purpose. please ensure your current address, telephone number and e-mail address are on your resume package. specific instructions for ontario work placement positions – these positions are also advertised in the employment network and can be viewed when you register for access these positions are available to all students each term, depending on government funding, and provide full-time employment opportunities. students who are approved must meet all of the following criteria: be enrolled in school full-time during the academic term prior to the work placement term, and have applied for and been assessed as eligible for osap assistance during that same period, and be returning to full-time studies at uw in the upcoming study term please keep in mind that you can only apply for these positions if you meet all three of the osap criteria mentioned above. application procedure for ontario work placement positions – view positions in the employment network, and apply to positions of interest. adhere to the application instructions, found at the end of each job description. submit one resume for each position, including your student id# and student awards position (sa) number. submit resume package in bin # 535 in front of career services, nh 1115. once your eligibility has been checked by the student awards office, your resume will be forwarded to the employer. you will be contacted directly by the employer if you are scheduled for an interview. career/job fairs co-sponsored by conestoga college, university of guelph, university of waterloo, and wilfrid laurier university – http://www.partners4employment.ca career services help with your resume/cover letter help with interview skills attend upcoming workshops please call career services at (519) 888-4047, e-mail at careers@uwaterloo.ca or visit us at career services.