career development manual - university of waterloo career development manual, second edition presented by career services university of waterloo, waterloo, ontario, canada steps to career/life planning success introduction with the changing nature of the workplace, concerns about the future have been expressed by many individuals, both those preparing to start a career and those having to adjust to job changes and job losses. stable and secure positions have disappeared. the future of work itself is being debated. organizations have relinquished the responsibility for employees’ professional development. you have been put in charge of your own career. managing it will be a lifelong process. discover your place in the world where you will be able to enjoy a high level of wellness. choose work that will be compatible with your own unique skills, knowledge, personality, and interests. define the balance that you would like to have with your work, finances, health, and relationships with family, friends and colleagues. be proactive! don’t just react to whatever chance or luck brings your way. your success depends upon understanding the changing nature of jobs and careers. be aware of trends, both local and global. big companies are getting smaller—they are downsizing and delayering, thereby reducing the number of promotions potentially available. companies are giving off functions to their suppliers, outsourcing, or entering into joint ventures, opening up opportunities for entrepreneurs. with existing technology, many small businesses can compete in the international marketplace just as easily as multinational corporations do. it is anticipated that many emerging careers will generate fewer new positions than in the past. fields experiencing major growth will demand job applicants with specific academic majors and work experience. some academic programs will have limited options for employment. for those graduates, it may be necessary to get additional preparation through special courses or a second degree. in addition to whatever academic background they specify, employers say they are looking for a person who is an independent decision-maker and self-managed learner, with a positive work attitude, a well-rounded education with math and computer literacy, communication skills including good use of words and grammar, interpersonal and time management skills, flexibility, and dependability. employers seem to be more interested in what you have done with your talents than on what talents you possess. your resume then is a testimony to "i have accomplished ..." rather than "i am ...." whether you are self-employed or an employee, acting in a more enterprising way will give you a competitive edge. to get fewer rejections and better results, enter the job market with marketable skills. follow a "customer-driven" approach. you will need to make sales presentations about yourself to potential buyers, possibly from all over the world. it’s hard to sell a product or service if you are not confident in it and cannot see the value to the purchaser. therefore, believe in yourself and show the benefits you offer. polish your presentations and deliver them enthusiastically to the right market. one caution, weigh the need for the employer to contact you with your need for safety and privacy when you go public with your credentials, particularly when using the internet. carefully select the type of workplace to fit your needs. some work environments provide great financial rewards but require long hours and produce high stress levels. some organizations encourage employees to be creative and take risks on one hand but then show displeasure when staff question existing procedures. some workplaces create conditions that permit the body, mind and spirit to thrive allowing employees to perform better. attitude is how you respond to situations in your life. keep a sense of humour. don’t worry about the future! prepare! visualize satisfying work, and expend your energy on locating customers who have needs you can fulfill. develop goals and strategies to make your dreams come true. the career development manual has been prepared to guide you through the necessary steps, whether you are looking for your 1st job or your 21st. begin now with step 1, self assessment.