letters letters effective letter writing is an essential aspect of your job search. good writing takes time and is hard work. compose documents that reflect your own personality. do not copy someone else's. send handwritten correspondence only when requested by the employer. this section of step 4 will discuss how to write cover and broadcast letters, thank-you letters, letters in response to being rejected for a job, withdrawing from consideration and declining a job offer letters, and accepting a job offer letter. strategies you will probably be in contact with several hundred people during your career planning and job search activities. these people form two groups: 1)pre-contact - you have not spoken with or written to them. 2)post-contact - the individuals know you from your previous contact with them. pre-contact: obtain the name and title of the person to whom you should write and ensure that you have the correct spelling. telephone the organization so that your information is current. use ms. to address a woman unless you know that she prefers miss or mrs. your correspondence will be better received when addressed to the correct person and not to a job title. post-contact: obtain the business card or carefully write out the name, title, address and phone number of each person during your initial contact so that you have this information available when you plan your follow-up activities. decide the focus of your letter, tailor your information to the reader, and ensure that all the points keep on topic. base your correspondence to employers around what you can do for them, not on what you want an employer to do for you. one page is the maximum for letters. let your enthusiasm be apparent. you do not want to lose the reader's interest before the person finishes the page. avoid the words, "as you can see", because the reader may not be able to "see" the point the way you do. check your first draft for the number of times you have written "i". overuse of "i", monotony of sentence structure, and rambling, boring text defeat your goal of writing an effective letter. try to limit your paragraphs to no more than four or five sentences and your sentences to a maximum of two lines. the first sentence in a paragraph introduces the topic to be covered in that paragraph. send an original, not copies that look mass-produced. keep a copy of your correspondence. follow up at the appropriate time as the person to whom you have written may not contact you. create letterhead and business cards for yourself, if you can do them well. if not, have a business service prepare them for you. you will appear to be more serious and professional in your work search. cover and broadcast letters a cover or broadcast letter accompanies your resume to introduce you to a prospective employer as a knowledgeable and capable applicant. you may wish to send your application package by overnight delivery to show the urgency and importance you place on being of service to the company. cover letters are used when applying to a specific, advertised position. only 20% of the positions available at any one time are advertised ("visible" job market), so do not limit yourself to these jobs. the position you want may not be advertised for a long time, if ever. you will have many competitors also trying to obtain an interview. in fact, 90% of all job seekers are applying to the 20% of advertised jobs. broadcast letters, directed at unadvertised jobs, inform managers of your credentials for future consideration. where are all those jobs that are not advertised? the jobs in this "hidden" job market can be found most easily by speaking with people. locate them by research using directories, newspapers, periodicals, professional organizations, and the internet. check out opportunities in business, industry, social service, education, and government. for more information, review the job search section in this manual. most people want to help you if they can, so ask for their assistance. through your inquiries, you should be able to get the names and addresses of people who hire for the work you would like to do. personally visit with these potential employers, or telephone them to arrange an appointment. if either method is not possible or feasible, your third alternative is a letter requesting a brief meeting. strategies apply for the position if you think you can do the job. the ideal candidate may not be available. the quality of your letter will determine the employer's first impression of you. before you begin to compose your cover or broadcast letter, review your thorough analysis of the job you want to apply for and also of yourself so that you can make a comparison. what are your strengths? based on your research of the organization, what competitive advantage do you have to offer to the employer? why would you want to work there? you will then be able to personalize your information because you will be writing to a specific organization. include only relevant information, particularly on your experience (paid and volunteer), education, accomplishments, and personal attributes required by the job in areas such as procedures, processes, equipment, technology. the letter highlights the most important information for that particular employer while your resume is more comprehensive. write down ideas as you think of them. then analyze the material, organize it into themes, and write in complete sentences incorporating those themes into paragraphs. stress the contributions you can make to the employer. stress your achievements and how they are transferable to the job you are applying for. from your research or the advertisement, note words such as "required, must have, very desirable, proficient in", and pay special attention to pointing out your strengths in these areas. use action verbs, but do not repeat verbatim what is in your resume. avoid using negative words or mentioning negative ideas. stress the qualifications you have for the job rather than mention those you do not have. avoid words such as "although" and "however" because you will set up a negative statement. in a broadcast letter, choose the phrasing of your job objective carefully. if you are too narrow, you may not be considered for some positions, but if you are too broad, you may be perceived as being unfocused or indecisive, just wanting any job. when sending letters into the hidden job market, don't send hundreds because you will not be able to do the necessary research. the response rate does not justify the time and cost. concentrate initially on 15-20. then expand to the next group of 15-20. more organizations are using equipment to scan resumes into their database. you can therefore increase the number of names on your mailing list, but only to the quantity of quality applications you can produce. type or word process your letters on good quality 8-1/2" x 11" paper (same stock as your resume if you prefer). ensure a neat, uncluttered and well-organized appearance. edit your draft for clarity, tone, accuracy, proper spelling, punctuation and grammar. send your letter and resume unfolded in a large envelope. key similarities and differences between cover and broadcast letters cover and broadcast letters are similar, and you should include the following elements: focus on your strengths for the job, highlighting them in such a way that the employer can clearly see a connection with that organization. interpret or elaborate upon your qualifications. give proof, using examples with specifics such as $s or #s to show that your assessment of your capabilities is accurate. differentiate yourself from your competitors for the position. the employer needs to be motivated to want to meet with you in a job interview. be positive and self confident but not egotistical: let the facts speak for themselves. include your resume to provide additional information. the following points demonstrate the differences between the two letters: cover: address and send to the person or office specified in the advertisement. if no name is included in the advertisement, try to obtain the name of the person receiving applications so that you can address your letter to a person rather than to an office. in your first paragraph, state the job title from the ad. mention what benefits you can bring and what interests you in the organization or position. after you think your application has been received by the employer, telephone to restate your interest in an interview and to inquire about the interview process and dates. broadcast: address and send to the head of the department you want to work in. if the organization is small, send to the president, executive director, or whoever is in one of the top positions. in your first paragraph, based upon your research, mention the job title or area you are interested in, what you can offer that they need, and what it is about that organization that appeals to you. include the name of the person(s) (with their permission) from whom you got information. do not leave the responsibility for arranging follow-up to the employer. advise that you will initiate, preferably stating how and when. comparison of cover and broadcast letters cover (actual job) broadcast (possible job) 1 page maximum, business format introduce yourself tell why you are writing excite reader in your credentials mention resume refer to some follow-up dear mr./ms. (last name): {preferred} dear sir/madam: (if not known) {alternate} dear mr./ms (last name): first paragraph: name job applying to and where saw/heard advertisement statement(s) summing up the benefits you bring to the employer state what interests you have in the organization and position name job or area you are interested in and starting date include a reference to the person(s) you spoke to about the organization state what interests you have in the organization and position and how you can meet the employer's needs middle paragraphs: (underline action verbs and circle aspects or components in job description to enable you to organize ideas) use employer's words whenever possible document your qualifications by themes and prove points by using examples organize paragraphs putting the most important ones first (based on your research, write your own job description, underline action verbs and circle aspects or components to enable you to organize ideas) document your qualifications by themes and prove points through examples organize paragraphs putting the most important ones first last paragraphs: refer to your resume enclosed mention you would like an interview to provide more information include your phone number with times to reach you, and your e-mail address refer to your resume enclosed mention the follow-up you will do, e.g., phone to arrange a mutually convenient time to meet, or, phone to discuss career opportunities. process to develop cover and broadcast letters letter writing can be difficult when you try to think of and organize ideas at the same time. use the following step-by-step sequence: 1. creating research notes for cover letter read the job description thoroughly and underline or highlight important points. research the job and company or organization as much as possible by reviewing literature, speaking with knowledgeable people, and searching the internet. make notes. obtain name of person your application goes to. 1. creating research notes for broadcast letter preview printed materials/videos and search the internet, then speak with people in the company/organization to get information. obtain name/title of person to whom you will apply (supervisor or manager of area you want to work in; president of small company; executive director of organization). record mailing address and phone number. decide upon type of work or title of position desired. list points about job and qualifications employer is looking for (e.g., skills, knowledge, personality traits, experience required, etc.) 2. brainstorming to get points about yourself write down ideas on your qualifications, randomly, as the thoughts come to you. what will set you apart from other applicants? why would the employer be better off with your mix of strengths? think about education, skills, knowledge, experience, personality, attitudes, achievements, potential. 3. developing paragraphs group your points together by themes, and decide which themes fit together to form your paragraphs. refer back to your notes to determine the order of importance for your paragraphs. (the job description is a clue for a cover letter.) 4. writing your first draft in complete sentences construct an opening sentence for the first paragraph. make your statements, expand upon the information, and give examples as proof. do the same for each paragraph as you proceed to write your letter. make sure you close with a strong paragraph exciting the employer to action, i.e., contacting you. 5. polishing and final copy rewrite as often as necessary to create clear, interesting and relevant information for the reader. type or word process onto appropriate paper. complete your final check. thank-you letters to everyone helping you send thank-you letters or notes as often as you can to everyone helping you to express your appreciation for their help, keep them up-to-date on your activities, and retain their support. thank each person you spoke with in an information interview. mention one or more helpful points you learned. you need not have made any decisions regarding the type of job you want to do before sending the letters as it is more important to be prompt (within 1-2 days). acknowledge in writing your appreciation to a networking contact who gave you tips on where the job openings are and who is hiring, or who referred you to others who can help. thank those who have agreed to provide references for you or otherwise speak on your behalf. (make sure you know the type of information they will say about you. is it accurate and complimentary?) always keep this group of people informed about your activities. for example, after an employer asks for your list of references, advise these people of the type of position and organization with whom you had your interview. then they will be able to tailor their information more appropriately to the employer who contacts them. thank-you letter for job interviews use this letter, the most neglected of all letters, to inform an employer of your interest in the position, summarize your chief credentials, and express your desire to be included in the next step of the interview process or to receive the job offer. promptly (within 24 hours) after an interview, send your letter which builds upon the strengths you discussed in the interview. you can also mention additional information that you forgot to include in your interview. remind the interviewer of your qualifications for the position and how the company could benefit. express appreciation to the interviewer(s) for the time and courtesy shown to you, e.g., tours, lunch. follow-up letter after being rejected for a job after you receive a "we do not wish to hire you at this time" letter from an employer, compose another letter. you can demonstrate your positive attitude to the organization. suggest that you are interested if another position similar to the one you were interviewed for becomes available. also mention that if a job arises that requires someone with your background, you would be interested in discussing the position. withdrawing from consideration letter inform the employer when you decide that you no longer want the job so that you can be removed from the active list of candidates. an employer will therefore not have to spend time and money trying to locate you to be told you are not interested. you will make it possible for the employer to concentrate on other applicants who do want the work. state your appreciation for the interview(s). write the letter as positively as you can to assure a future amicable relationship. declining a job offer letter write a tactful, friendly letter thanking the employer for the job offer and expressing regret that you will not be able to accept their offer at this time. include, if you wish, information on the aspects you preferred in the job you did accept but which were not present in the job you declined, e.g., more customer contact, more writing and editing, more research and development in xyz. avoid negative overtones so that an employer's goodwill towards you and their high regard for you will be maintained. it will be easier to re-apply for work in the future. accepting a job offer letter when you accept a job offer, confirm the details in writing. express your enthusiasm about undertaking the position and reiterate all terms discussed during the interview period so that any misunderstanding can be cleared away before beginning the first day of work. include a brief paragraph mentioning why you believe the employer made the right decision. state the title of the position you will be assuming and the starting date. confirm all arrangements agreed upon during the interview, e.g., salary, car allowance, stock options, reimbursement of moving expenses. add any other particulars that may be important. sample letter writing resources in career services beatty, richard. the perfect cover letter. toronto, on: john wiley & sons. 1989. frank, william s. 200 letters for job hunters. berkeley, ca: ten speed press. 1990. hansen, katharine and randall hansen. dynamic cover letters. berkeley, ca: ten speed press. 1990. krannich, ronald l. and caryl rae krannich. dynamite cover letters, and other great job search letters. manassas, va: impact publications. 1992. block format your letterhead: street/e-mail addresses, voice/fax phone numbers or your street your city/town, province your postal code date name of person title, department name of organization street address city/town, province, postal code salutation (dear ...:) opening paragraph/introduction body of the letter - thematic paragraph or paragraphs depending on amount of information closing paragraph closing (yours truly or words of your preference) your signature your name (typed) encl. or attach. indented format your letterhead: street/e-mail addresses, voice/fax phone numbers or your street your city/town, province your postal code date name of person title, department name of organization street address city/town, province, postal code salutation (dear ...:) opening paragraph/introduction body of the letter - thematic paragraph or paragraphs depending on amount of information closing paragraph closing (yours truly or words of your preference) your signature your name (typed) encl. or attach.