success at work success at work after you have successfully completed those critical steps to finding your job (whether paid or volunteer), ensure that it will be a pleasant experience. during your first few weeks or months you will go through an orientation and probation period. if you are not getting feedback from your employer, request it. ask your supervisor or team leader about your strengths and your weaknesses. take advantage of the feedback to learn how you can improve your performance on the job. you are showing that you would like to meet their needs and are eager to fit into the organization. as you become more comfortable, any initial nervousness will subside. you will also be developing the good work habits that future employers want. do's and don'ts to help you fit into the organization: interpersonal skills try to work well with others and maintain a good relationship with your boss and co-workers, avoid confrontations do not make criticisms about the job or other employers in public; don’t complain be patient not only with your co-workers and boss but also with the tasks associated with your job learn to listen properly to those around you; take the time to comprehend fully and assimilate their requests or instructions be sensitive to others, do not gossip keep a sense of humour, but make sure it's appropriate humour; avoid profanity competence set rigorous standards for yourself create a positive first impression improve your skills, especially in oral and written communication ask questions or research answers if you're not sure so as not to proceed in error admit and learn from mistakes and accept suggestions for improvement ensure your training program is relevant and in sufficient depth to enable you to perform up to expectations in your position take extra courses or training outside of work on your own time master technology; keep skills current show initiative, such as arriving early and leaving late, making suggestions, working extra hard volunteer for committees or projects to become noticed and recognized dependability be prompt in getting reports or assignments finished arrive on time for work, meetings and appointments time management do not procrastinate; prioritize your tasks identify your best time for working on challenging tasks i.e., a.m., p.m. master the flood of information you will get every day use commuting time for learning activities compatibility participate in social activities so that others can get to know you better but keep your actions and reputation in mind avoid internal office politics maintain discretion in amount of socializing on work time wear appropriate clothing value your role as an effective team player do not talk too much about your previous jobs or activities remember, ask for help when you need it. and most importantly, have realistic expectations about the job before you start.