career services' working abroad pamphlet so, you want to work abroad? six steps to success introduction going international... why and what to check... where can you find... what to look for ... how to prepare... living in europe, asia or... introduction... foreign jobs are not easy to come by, so start your preparation early. are you one of the 50 000 to 100 000 people (according to jean-marc hachey, author of "the canadian guide to working and living abroad") dreaming about working on a cruise ship, in a refugee camp for the united nations, in an embassy in the far east or for a private school in south america? all of these jobs are possible, but definitely not easy to come by, so start preparing early. table of contents going international... international jobs come in many forms, and the amount of time and difficulty it will take to find the right one for you depends on the type of work you are looking for. short term or seasonal positions will be easier to locate while professional positions are more difficult to obtain. an alternative to working overseas can be working in the national branch of an international company/organization where you are exposed to foreign business practices, customs, and culture. this might even include some travel outside canada. table of contents why and what to check... an international career is a series of jobs that requires employees to conduct their work across national borders or between at least two cultures within a single country. why do you want an international job? what do you see yourself doing overseas? do you want to work only as a means to support your travel in a new country or continent, or do you consider your international experience as a stepping stone for your career? do you want some fun time away from home or do you want to get seriously involved in the other country? a thorough self assessment (see workshop) and the following points will help you to focus your ideas. do you like to try new foods? do you like to be around people who are different from you? do you speak another language or do you like to learn new words in another language? can you deal with sudden changes or delays? do you consider yourself adventurous and creative? are you willing to take risks? do people think you have a good sense of humour? being multiculturally aware, multiculturally sensitive and multiculturally tolerant besides demonstrating a good academic background will give you the leading edge to work in an international milieu. table of contents where can you find... develop a multicultural attitude to become multiculturally competent. where can you find information about international opportunities? using the same job search techniques that you learned in the job search workshop, you can take full advantage of both traditional and creative ways to find interesting opportunities. first, have you identified the type(s) of program(s) and country(ies)? i want to ... action verbs (research, analyze, design, develop, consult, train...) + product/service (health, literacy, education, agriculture, engineering...) + type of organization (public, government, private, voluntary...) + geographic region (asia, pacific, middle east...) = knowledge of where to begin the "additional resources" section and the work/study abroad section of the career resource centre (crc) will open more avenues for your search. professional and trade associations, consulates, international student associations on campus (see federation of students listing), ethnic groups or clubs within the community might provide a wealth of information for you and good opportunities to network (remember all the tips you got at the networking workshop?). popular international work programs are iaeste for technical, science and engineering related jobs - aiesec for business/commerce related jobs - and swap for general summer jobs. some academic exchange programs have a work component included, so check the listing in the work/study abroad section in the crc. several departments on campus have connections to work sites abroad which we may not know about. don't underestimate the value of contacting departments on your own. the sojourns computer database (also available in the crc) lists a large variety of jobs/internships/volunteer positions all over the world that could make for excellent international exposure. table of contents what to look for... work permits can be real obstacles in your planning - be patient and persistent. obtaining visa/work permits can be the biggest obstacle. sometimes you need to know what approach is most likely to get you a visa before you talk to embassies or consulates. try to find out what preferred status - tourist, businessperson, consultant or specialist - will give you the best and quickest result. some countries will not let you enter unless you have an airline ticket out of the country or a visa to the next one. other countries might ask you for proof of available funds or require that you buy a minimum of their currency. talk to people who have recently been in your country of interest to get the latest update. besides visa/work permit regulations, it will be very important to get information about health regulations in your country of choice. do you need vaccinations before you leave? is there medication to take before your departure? table of contents how to prepare... resume + handwritten cover letter + personal information might be expected of you. how to apply to companies/organizations abroad? as a general rule your "canadian" style resume (did you attend the resume + letter writing workshops?) should work well for you. put special emphasis on your international skills such as languages spoken and/or written, previous international work/travel or volunteer experience, and dual citizenship etc. point out special skills that will set you apart from other candidates. if possible, prepare your resume in the official language of your chosen country and get it checked by a professional. you may be asked to provide personal information like birthdate, marital status etc. as other countries have different human rights laws than canada, and it is your decision if you want to include this type of information or not. in many european countries the cover letter is hand written. it is strongly suggested that your cover letter be hand written (attach a typed copy if your hand writing can't be read) in the language of the country. interviewing with an international employer can be a challenge (sign up for the interview workshops). be well prepared. read about the country's customs, the do's and don'ts and talk to people who have worked in that specific region of the world. table of contents living in europe, asia or... be prepared for culture shock and take it in stride. living outside of canada might be a new experience for you. learn as much as possible about your new country and its people before you leave. books, videos, computer based sources, staff at travel agencies, embassies are good sources of information. brush up on your knowledge of current affairs - inside and outside your national borders. try to get names/addresses from other students currently on visits, exchanges, and work terms to share experiences with. keeping in touch with home through mail, fax, e-mail and phone will help you overcome the culture shock you might be going through at the beginning of your new adventure. while this might sound negative, remember that the new environment will present you with many opportunities to grow as a person and will help you develop your international career. barry yeates, who is a consultant in the field of international career and foreign service, offers the following advice for starters: "my subjective recommendations as to courses to take and must items to read for students seeking international opportunities are as follows: courses: canadian history and politics, 20th century foreign policies (no theory!), international organizations, macro and development economics, international business and finance, any literature or culture course available on the country or region of interest, and a language; reading: the globe and mail (daily) and the economist (weekly)." table of contents additional resources credits for comments and suggestions, please feel free to email kerry mahoney, supervisor, career resource centre. last updated: december 5, 1995.