knowledge knowledge & learning style in addition to finding out who you are (personality/attitudes) and what you can do (skills), you need to know what you know. you have learned information by attending classes, working on projects, independent reading, and travelling, to name just a few methods. in the first exercise in this section, look at your formal education, where you got a diploma or certificate or recognition from someone for what you studied. only 20% of what you know has been learned this way. include points on: university college high school other through courses projects papers theses discuss: specialization, options subjects you liked most and least, and why marks certificates, diplomas and other awards obtained name of institution: dates and particulars: name of institution: dates and particulars: list the knowledge you have gained through other educational opportunities. include dates, companies/organizations and topics for both formal and informal training. include the training provided by employers on and off their premises. include the training you received through your volunteer or other activities. training provided by employers training provided by volunteer organizations training received in other ways now you need to think about the 80% of your knowledge that you gained on your own and may want to use in some way in a work setting. what i have learned through travel, my own research, and other ways review all your notes in the section on knowledge. choose the 5 main areas of knowledge that you have and would like to build on in your career. 5 main areas of knowledge 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. learning style learning style refers to characteristic ways of processing information and behaving in learning situations. awareness of your personal style will help you identify your strengths and weaknesses. enhancing your thinking and problem-solving skills is a requisite in today’s information age. following is a list of some of the tools and environments: unstructured or highly structured environment, own speed, small step sequences, working alone in a quiet surroundings, working in a group with noise in the background, forming pictures in my mind, touching the object, computer-based instruction, field work, case studies, thoughtful dialogue, role playing, lecture, simulation, interactive multi-media, writing logs or journals, critiques of my written material, workbooks, study guides, videos, films, games, reading about something first and then trying it out, trying something out first and then reading about it later. you have acquired much information and many skills, e.g., mathematical theory, ice skating. group different situations together, and record your preferred ways and environments. some of the ways i learn best: