career/life planning - re-evaluation career/life planning re-evaluation it’s time for a check-up now that you have been doing this work for a while. is your job providing you with all the benefits you had hoped, e.g., sense of accomplishment, income, career growth? do you get out of bed in the morning with energy and enthusiasm because you truly like and have pride in what you do, a feeling that your work is useful to someone? what adjustments do you need to make to bring that dream you had back on track? is it time for a new vision, a new sense of what you want to do with your life? below are some questions. add others that fit your situation. think positively about the results of this self-evaluation—whatever the outcome. you may just take the right steps in time to avert a crisis. do you know how you contribute to the overall success of the organization, i.e., your role in the big picture of the company’s changes to be competitive and excel in the marketplace? having this knowledge about yourself applies equally to the profit and non-profit sectors of the economy. has management acknowledged your contributions, especially regarding attitudes, conduct and productivity? when it comes time for restructuring or beginning a new project, those individuals with perceived value will be rewarded with a new assignment. do you still expect great things from yourself and others? are you part of a world-class work group? are you receiving cross-training or rotational assignments to add to your personal and career development? are you contributing to team-building, conflict resolution, the training of others, and to the total systems approach to improvement? have you hit a brick wall in your growth and advancement? do you feel you are in the wrong place and need to do something different within that organization or a different organization? is it time to become self-employed, or to move from self-employment to the payroll of an organization? are you seeing problems rather than challenges in your everyday work? attitude makes the difference between being dragged down by problems rather than enervated with challenges. are you putting forth your share of solutions, creative answers? do you see yourself as an innocent victim in the fast-paced changes happening in the organization and in the world? have you battled with expediency or politics when deciding an issue? are there too many times when it is difficult for you to do what you think is right or to maintain your integrity? are there constant moral conflicts? what encouragement do you get to continue your learning activities? in this age of always having to be ready for something new, do you receive training, financial reimbursement, etc.? have you established a relationship with a mentor, or mentors, inside or outside of your workplace? how has the association been helpful to you? are you ready to be a mentor to someone who could learn from your experience and achievements? do you feel that you are earning the money you are being paid, i.e, are you putting forth the effort that equals the compensation? have you undertaken more responsibility or greater amounts of work and feel you are not being adequately remunerated for it? where is accumulating wealth positioned in comparison to other priorities in your life? has your work positively or negatively affected your personal health and habits, as well as your relationship with family and friends? you may find a pattern emerging in your answers. is there need for: (1) a drastic change? (2) a relatively minor correction? (3) a pat on your back because you are moving along well toward your short- and long-term goals! when necessary, start again at step 1 in the manual to achieve career/life planning success. the final advice on successful management of career/life issues goes to d.l. patterson, b.sc., '86, fitness trainer, cambridge physiotherapy & rehabilitation centre what i needed to know during my uw days (prepared in january, 1993) 1. importance of networking: i know now that jobs are had often through contacts, even student membership in associations. membership notifies you about upcoming opportunities, names of contacts, helpful courses/seminars/workshops, and keeps you abreast of contemporary issues in your field. universities teach the importance of class and lab work—primarily "textbook" knowledge. yet to maximize employment possibilities, students need to get out of the library and make connections, do volunteer work, develop their people skills. 2. which supplementary courses supplement? i could kick myself for even the one or two "bird" courses i took just to fulfill the quota of required electives. i knew so many people who enrolled in so many such courses to breeze through school or to up their average. what a waste! on the other hand, i'm very thankful for the excellent quality of uw curricula, where i had an opportunity to augment my kinesiology studies with a variety of therapeutic recreation and psychology courses which proved invaluable for working with "special" populations. 3. the sheer magnitude of future prospects (and, employment opportunities are "made"): i cannot believe i still hear new grads say there are no jobs "out there", or that they have no idea what they can do with a degree in .... to claim that there are no possibilities, even during tough economic times, is a lame excuse for personal incompetence in investigating the options. and how could you know your options unless you furnish yourself with pertinent experiences (see #1 above)? how to "go for it"? in my final term, i devoted every tuesday (a light course load day) to job search efforts. i spent weeks honing my resume, cover letters, etc., and reading job hunt tips. i perused newspapers, wrote/called/visited companies, and developed a simple filing system to keep track of these contacts/applications. during my last few weeks of school, i had job interviews throughout southern ontario and i had a choice! of employment positions. now, i must confess. i was not a top student scholastically. i am basically very average in every way. but i know me—my strengths, weaknesses, areas of interest, goals. 4. never misrepresent yourself: hopefully i have never fallen prey to this, but i've seen it in others, and they ultimately have suffered for it. the best way to avoid this is through ongoing self-appraisal. when i was pres. of our ont. kin. assoc., i once wrote a newsletter article on this topic. therein i stated that at any given moment in time, on any given topic, we all are situated somewhere along a continuum from exposure, to experienced, to expert. recent grads often portray themselves as experienced or even as experts in a field, when in fact, they simply have had a glimpse of exposure in that area. if you admit you are "green", then at least you've given yourself permission to screw up occasionally. a self-acclaimed expert may have significant finances, manpower, and resources invested in his/her work which a workplace will not happily see wasted. also at stake is one's reputation...something not easily retrieved. 5. the whole me: another tragedy of university life is a loss of identity. again, i hope i was not a victim here. many implode themselves with academia and subsequently graduate as a shallow, stale, burnt out uw clone. were you athletic before university? keep it up! were you musical, good in languages, or ... whatever! don't change. keep on expanding yourself. i do not, of course, neglect my work for the sake of excelling in my interests. however, my entire sense of self-worth is not exclusively generated by that single aspect of my life—work. 6. finally: i would say i needed more practical, hands-on skills upon graduation. i have read more, studied harder, and attended more physical rehab. related courses since graduation than i ever expected.