employment contacts - job/work search employment contacts employer contact comprises all your activities between making the decision about the work you are interested in and considering the job offer(s) you have received. the main areas are: searching for work or job openings, preparing resumes and letters, and presenting your qualifications in an interview. job/work search looking for employment is one of the most challenging jobs you will ever have. finding "your" job rather than "a" job is important, as work plays a big role in contributing to the sense of satisfaction in your life. as you begin to look for your next position, think about how it fits into your overall career plan. is it work that will give you the experience you need to begin or continue your progression toward your longer-term career goals? is it work you will enjoy doing? feel passionate about? sections getting ready traditional methods of finding openings creative methods of marketing yourself starting your own business researching employers networking: developing leads & making contacts getting ready the longer you are inactive and postpone job search activities, the harder it will be to start. "a body in motion tends to stay in motion." fear of failure can also lead to procrastination. unfortunately, many job seekers have an unrealistic picture of how much time job search takes. it is never too early to begin making contacts. start in the fall term for a summer job. for co-op, internship, contract or on-going (permanent) positions, monitor the job market year-round so that your research is up-to-date. if you are still in school, or working full-time but wanting to change jobs, plan to spend up to 8 hours each week. after graduation, or if you are currently unemployed, your search should become full-time. an example: if unemployed or not in school, 8 hours sleeping, 8 hours job search activities, and 8 hours exercising, socializing, doing chores, and volunteering. if you have been searching for several weeks or months, an employer will want to know how you have been spending your time. have activities with a practical application to the job market to talk about. for technical people whose knowledge may become outdated quickly, be able to show how you are staying current in your field. review your worksheets from steps 1, 2 and 3 at the beginning of the manual so that you can direct your job search efforts. know what is important to you, know what you enjoy or do not enjoy doing, know what skills you have to offer, and know what type of work is a good fit for you. in short, only you know what kind of work you want and what you are best qualified for. without a focus, you will not be able to prepare excellent resumes and letters, or sell your strengths in interviews. be able to discuss your accomplishments. employers today want to know why you selected them and what you are prepared to do for them. also, think about your life beyond this work you are looking for. where are you heading in the future? now is the time to form the foundation for those 20+ jobs and 7+ careers you likely have ahead of you. what skills will you need to develop or update? working overseas you are living in a global village. as you are thinking about the type of work you want to do, consider if, or how, you would like to be connected to the international community. there are several ways: living in canada and being in contact with people in other countries through correspondence, telephone or e-mail; living in canada and travelling on behalf of your employer to other countries; living and working in another country. employers who hire for international assignments will look at your qualifications from two perspectives: (1) the specific knowledge and skills required to do the work well (e.g., experience in managing projects, proficiency in the language of the country, computer programming) and (2) your ability to excel in a cross-cultural setting (e.g., sensitivity, flexibility, self-discipline). following are some points that you will need to consider: what are your reasons for wanting to work overseas? (hopefully not running away from something, e.g., difficulty with interpersonal relationships may not change but intensify in a different setting) what countries or geographical regions would you prefer? what type of work are you most qualified for and most interested in? what methods will you use to locate employment opportunities? there are many excellent resources available to help you research information to ensure that your expectations are realistic and achievable. some of these resources are listed in the bibliography at the end of the job/work search section. working overseas level of interest questions notes devising a plan to find employment develop a plan. your job search should not be random activities. map out your strategy in advance. if not, you could find yourself back at your starting point with little accomplished for the time you have spent. set daily and weekly objectives so that you will have a concrete way to evaluate your progress. determine the amount of time you will allocate for: identifying target organizations, researching, making contacts and following up. set your priorities. schedule at least one activity away from home each day to get yourself out into the community and energized. be sure to document every step. this will save you time, keep you organized and prevent embarrassing errors. consider that you may be in contact with 15 organizations in the span of one week. you don't want to make a costly mistake. imagine showing up for a meeting at the right time but at the wrong place! an example of a record-keeping form is included at the end of the employment contacts section. prepare business cards. they are an effective, fairly inexpensive method of leaving information with anyone who has the potential to lead you to job openings. a summary card with the equivalent of a 30-second commercial about your strengths can fill a need where a business card may be too brief and a resume may be too lengthy. organizing support you will need support while undertaking your job search. first, you will need financial support. if you do not have much in the way of savings, you may want to consider part-time work. try to look for something with a flexible schedule. this will allow you to attend interviews at times suggested by employers. some jobs (e.g., sales) give you an added opportunity to speak with many people from diverse employment backgrounds. jobs through a temporary employment agency may be an alternative. you may need to take an interim job until the position you would like becomes available. this type of job also allows you to broaden your qualifications and develop contacts in the areas of your interests. second, moral support is very important. "no" will reach your ears more often than "yes". to minimize the number of "no’s", ask as many open-ended questions as possible to find out information and get advice. it may still become difficult to avoid feelings of rejection, discouragement and lack of self-worth. for each "no", analyze the circumstances. are the factors outside of or within your control? work diligently on those you can control and let the others go. also, try to surround yourself with people who are most likely to boost your confidence. volunteer—an organization will appreciate your help. the people there will become aware of your enthusiasm and the quality of your work. another benefit will come if you have the opportunity to work and interact with other volunteers. they may be able to give you some information and advice about your job search activities. celebrate your achievements every day. examples of successes could be: finalizing the arrangements to meet a contact; completing 10 telephone call-backs by lunch-time; getting company information that was difficult to locate; speaking with a hiring manager briefly in person. reward yourself with a pleasurable activity. take some time out each week to participate in social or recreational activities, or hobbies. you need the break to renew your level of energy. imagining success visualize the work you would like to have. create mental pictures of yourself accepting the new job and working in an interesting and stimulating position. if you cannot imagine what it will be like, it will be hard for you to achieve it. an active imagination can help you overcome obstacles in your way. traditional methods of finding openings advertised positions account for 10% - 20% of all jobs open at any given time. approximately 90% of all job-seekers apply to these advertised openings. while it is appropriate to use the following job-search methods, you should spend only 1/5th of your time and energy in this pursuit. institutional placement services check the jobs listed at your educational institution(s). find out if they are available year-round or when the best times would be for follow-up. look at career services home page at http://www.careerservices.uwaterloo.ca for information about job opportunities for summer, contract and on-going (permanent) positions for uw students/alumni. human resources development canada employment centres check in the centres for vacancies across canada. inquire also about job finding clubs. during the summer, the canada employment centre for students also has positions listed. check for a variety of positions on their national employment listings website. personnel/employment agencies there are good ones and bad ones. check out their reputation to see if you feel comfortable in having them represent you. discuss their procedures so there would be no overlap where you and they would send resumes. read the contract to ensure you understand what is required of you. investigate thoroughly those who charge fees to the applicant to ensure you would be getting value for your money. what incentive would they have to find you work? employment ads in newspapers and professional papers/magazines remember that the employer is advertising for the ideal candidate. if you don't think that you have all the requirements but feel that you can do the job ... apply! you may be the most qualified person for the job. however, be realistic. if you don’t measure up on a critical qualification, e.g., being bondable, you’ll waste their time and yours. do not disregard a job because of the job title. read all the ads because some are alphabetically listed according to the first letter of the first word which may not be the job title. look at and analyze the job description. the text will also be a strong indicator as to the nature of the position. words such as "self starter, challenging" will denote requirements for a different kind of person than words such as "reliable, conscientious". check the jobs advertised in the career section of the newspaper in addition to those in the classified section. watch also for companies that have several advertisements listed. you may have found a company in hiring mode with additional jobs not yet advertised. internet sites with job advertisements and resume matching services both profit and non-profit organizations are using the internet to hire because of the low cost compared to newspaper advertising. through an employment or career opportunities section on the organization’s own web pages, the information is available 7 days/week, 24 hours/day until someone is hired. the company can broaden their search to include individuals worldwide and make it easy for candidates to apply through a direct e-mail connection. changes to the advertisements can be made quickly whenever necessary. some companies are including bonus information such as how to get ready for and submit an application, as well as how to prepare for a job interview. in addition to job fairs where employers meet candidates in person, virtual job fairs are becoming popular with employers. a fair can be organized by a company on its own behalf, or by a company for several organizations. check out also the large multi-purpose sites and bookmark your favourites. they offer any combination of: job listings, resume databases, discussion groups, career planning information, industry updates, and links to other sites of interest. since job titles in electronic advertisements (as in non-electronic ads) may not reflect the job content, look at a wide variety of positions. as you are reading through the job descriptions, pay special attention to the most important qualifications mentioned, including the up-to-date ones. these are the key words you will need to include in your resume. if you don’t have those qualifications, you will probably need to get them to be competitive. some newspapers also provide web pages where they include jobs which were advertised in their newspapers. some recruitment firms also have web pages listing jobs they received from their clients. many companies have set up a business matching jobs received from employers with resumes received from people looking for positions. in fact, there are so many databases where you can submit your resume that you will need to do some careful screening in order to get the level of service you want. some companies will charge you to put your resume on file. however, it is usually preferable to have the employer pay rather than you. when a position is received, the computer sorts through your resume information. because the computer uses key words to search for candidates, you will need to have the appropriate qualifications presented in an easily identifiable format. (more information on preparing an electronic version of your resume is in the resume writing section of the manual.) if there is a match, your resume and/or a summary of your information is forwarded to the employer. choose your level of confidentiality. some companies do not permit employers to examine their database. the search is conducted by their own staff. therefore, if you are currently employed or decide that your resume should not go to a particular employer, the company is able to control where resumes are sent. with other companies, you are given a code number so that your personal identification is omitted, and provided only after you give your consent. to maximize your time and money using the internet for job search, here are some points for thought. which companies should you list your resume with? (develop a list of criteria important to you and check out the policies of the firms.) do they receive jobs in the field you are interested in? how many jobs that would fit your qualifications do they typically receive? how large is the database and what type of job seekers are represented in the greatest numbers? do they charge job applicants? how often can job seekers update their files? what information is given to an employer: the actual resume, paper or electronic copy, a summary, etc.? how would you know if your resume has been forwarded to an employer? how long is an applicant kept on the database? after applying to electronic jobs, if possible, follow up with a phone call to speak personally with the hiring manager and the human resources person processing applications. state your interest and inquire about the hiring process, timelines, etc. at this point, you may have one of two responses: (1) i don’t want to want to go on-line or (2) the internet is the answer to getting my job. for those of you having the first reaction, you could hire an expert to do your work for you. however, at some point you will need to learn how to search job banks, send your resume electronically, research employers, network, and keep up-to-date in your field. now may be the best time to become proficient. although you may find work by using the internet exclusively, the effectiveness of this method varies according to the type of work being sought. don’t use it as your only job search tool. to help you get started, view career services home page at http://www.careerservices.uwaterloo.ca creative methods of marketing yourself there are several phases before an advertisement appears for a job. the hidden job market refers to points (1) through (3). (1) work needs to be done, but no one has recognized the fact. (2) people realize their need but nothing has been done to find someone. (3) an outline of requirements is written and people are informally looking for candidates. (4) no qualified candidate was located so job description is given to human resources to advertise. it is a generally acknowledged fact that between 80% - 90% of all jobs available at a given time are not advertised. chances are very high that you will locate your work independently. accordingly, you should spend 4/5th of your job search time on creative pursuits. read articles about companies reporting their business plans, expansions, changes, new additions. consider small to medium sized employers as more jobs are being created in these sectors. you need to target your application to the person who would hire for the position. remember, managers are always looking for good people even if there is no immediate opening. applying to hiring managers in person this is probably the most effective method, but it is becoming increasingly difficult to meet with people who hire because of their increased workloads and the numbers of job seekers who are wanting to speak with them. however, do your research, prepare your resume, and go. if you are in the area anyway, you may find it productive to walk in and ask if the head of the department you would like to work in could speak with you. it's more difficult to dismiss a person than another piece of paper. the personnel or human resources office only learns of upcoming positions once managers have exhausted their own private sources. even if you are not able to speak with the manager, there may be someone else available to fill you in on additional background to help you in your application. through a telephone call if distance does not permit an initial personal visit, telephone to make preliminary inquiries and/or to arrange a meeting at a mutually convenient time. when you have the hiring manager on the phone, be ready to make a strong first impression. state your name first and then how you found out about him/her, (e.g., name of person who referred you). present your 30- to 60-second commercial about what you can contribute to the department. ask for a meeting to be able to provide more details. you may wish to suggest a date and time and ask if that would be convenient. be as flexible as possible around the employer’s busy schedule. if the person doesn’t want to meet with you, ask if you could phone again in 2 to 3 weeks to inquire about opportunities. by broadcast letter/resume for maximum effectiveness, follow up the mailing with a phone call and visit. remember to address your letter to a particular person who is the head of the department you want to work in, not to a title like "marketing manager". if you are not able to get the person’s name through alumni or your networking contacts, phone the company in question. you may also be able to obtain the information through a resource such as employer directories. however, you will want to phone to ensure that the person listed in the directory is still manager of the department. in your letter, mention how you found out about the position and include the name of the person who referred you, if you were given permission to do so. tailor your qualifications to the employer’s needs. to bring your qualifications back into the employer’s mind, you are able to write again when you have updated your resume, so that the latest one can be on file. with so many resumes being received by employers, yours needs to attract their attention and be readable in 15 seconds or less! the focus is on what you can contribute. a poor response rate can often be attributed to what appears to be a lack of self direction. include your career objective and relate your abilities, skills and experience to that specific area within the organization. with more employers using computer applicant tracking systems to help with the workload of screening both solicited and unsolicited resumes, it can be to your advantage to target as large a number of employers as you can prepare applications tailored to those employer’s needs, using appropriate terminology. the cost to you is minimal and at least you are in their database if they are looking for a person with your qualifications. however, do not depend solely on this method of job search to produce job interviews for you. most people still get their work through personal contact. more information on writing broadcast letters and resumes can be found in the resume and letter writing sections. job creation have you identified a problem that you feel able to solve? you may wish to prepare an outline of a proposal and send it to the employer. if interested, the employer could request the full proposal and arrange a meeting with you to discuss it. impressed with your qualifications and the benefits you could offer, many companies would be glad to create a position for someone who could save them time and/or money. investigate the sources of government funding which may be available to an employer to help to hire you. think of yourself as an entrepreneur or independent contractor. starting your own business more and more people are starting their own business(es). even during recessionary periods, small business has managed to increase in size and number of jobs while many larger businesses have been downsizing. the development of new technologies has made it much easier for entrepreneurs to establish new industries and services. it is indeed a challenge to decide what consumers’ needs will be next week, month, and year and provide them in a timely way. success in business is determined by managerial skills & entrepreneurial behaviour. to be successful, do you have the personality motivation business acumen, and experience (knowledge and skills to be judged competent by your customers, e.g., software development, horticulture)? (1) personality: how high do you score on the following characteristics of successful entrepreneurs? optimism, self-esteem, good health, initiative, creativity, vision, trustworthiness; desire for autonomy; ability to communicate, organize, solve problems, make decisions, and deal with & orchestrate change; copious amounts of endurance, tenacity, and energy; willingness to take calculated risks. will your business require you to work alone, without other people around? if so, can you prosper? will you have the necessary support from friends and relatives? can you handle competition? can you thrive on the unexpected? are you an excellent strategist? review your strengths as you described them in the self assessment section. does there seem to be a fit? (2) motivation: what rewards or advantages would you like to get from your own business? what is motivating you to seriously consider this option now? are you looking for economic independence, the opportunity to realize your own ideas, the freedom to act and make your own decisions, or the possibility to work when and where you want, i.e., to be in control of your life? are you being realistic? money may come in later, probably not in the beginning. your customers’ needs will actually determine what decisions you make and to a great extent, the location and hours of service. (3) business acumen: do you have what it takes to run a business if you do not have a partner or associates helping with some of the aspects? if you lack expertise in one or more areas, outsourcing may be a solution. areas include: financing, merchandise/services, pricing, sales, customer credit, advertising and promotion, employees, facilities, equipment and supplies, purchasing, operating procedures, insurance, record keeping, tax and legal issues, government regulations. (4) experience: since there is such a high failure rate for new businesses, you will want to reduce the risks as much as possible. you will need to identify business opportunities relating to your skills. are you able to analyze consumer needs and marketplace trends in order to decide upon which products and services are needed and which you have the capability to provide? do you want to focus on (1) producing goods and services; (2) selling or buying and reselling goods and services produced; or (3) providing investments for the production and selling of goods and services (e.g. venture capital)? test the market. is there a demonstrated need? what code of business ethics will you adopt (e.g., maximizing profits while fulfilling social responsibility regarding environmental pollution)? presenting a professional image will help you gain the confidence of your clients. your customers will make value judgements based on personal interactions with you, as well as upon your telephone service, stationery and business cards. you will need to find your niche, and provide a high level of customer service. business/marketing plans decide upon a business name and register it if necessary. write a business plan and update it regularly to determine if you are meeting your goals. good guides for writing a plan are available. how will people hear about you in order to check out your products or services? complete a marketing plan so that you can get the best value for advertising dollars. practice so that you will be able to (1) describe your business in 20 seconds or less, and (2) end with a strong close to encourage a sale. study what impact, if any, international trade will have on your business. develop a vision for 2-3 years into the future so that goal setting will be easier. modifications to the plan can be made when necessary. will you be successful alone, or do you need one or more other people to join with you as you work toward a common goal? whatever you choose to do, you will need to have a passion for the work to get you through the rough times. being able to laugh and have fun will make your work much more pleasurable. financing with a little capital, it is possible to start a small business. you could begin on a part-time basis while employed elsewhere. there have been interest-free loans available through provincial government sources for both summer and on-going (permanent) jobs. check to see what programs are currently being sponsored. perhaps you could finance the start-up and operating costs with your own savings, or with a loan from a friend or relative. what will the initial financial repercussions be on your family? what will you have to give up? homepreneurs and telecommuters decide if the work you want to do could be done from your home. it is a more economical way to begin. however, by working at home, you will have your work there 24 hours a day and 7 days a week. will you be able to establish some balance in your life? what percentage of time would you like to set aside for personal, recreational, educational and other activities? telecommuting is becoming a way of life for many people through their own choice, or by companies wanting to reduce the number of employees working at their business location. for the telecommuters, there are similar pluses and minuses as experienced by homepreneurs. you will also need to work out an arrangement with your employer regarding your projects, reporting method, hours available, performance evaluation, etc. researching employers you will want to do some employer research to: (1) see if you are interested in working for a particular company or organization, (2) find out about different types of jobs or work that you may be hired to do, and (3) prepare for an interview. what type of information should you look for? history and potential growth for employer and industry restructuring, downsizing, re-engineering activities products and services location(s) annual sales for past year(s) compared to industry trends employer's major competitors ownership of organization; impact of family ownership on possible advancement potential for non-profit organization: its purpose, funding, clientele and functions/activities management style, corporate culture number of employees organizational structure, working climate/atmosphere, workload amount of subordinates' participation in decision-making activities training and development programs typical career path promotion policy use of technology, amount and type of equipment where can you find this information? career services employer files, binders and videos employer directories, books and computers (cd roms) telephone books magazines and newspapers work term summaries volunteer files (non-profit organizations) alumni directory computers with internet access dana porter library directories for kitchener-waterloo area, ontario, and canada telephone directories for canada, u.s. major cities (microfiche) canada: blue book of canadian business, fraser’s canadian trade directory, scott’s u.s.: million dollar directory, standard & poor’s register of corporations, directors and executives, united states and canada, thomas register of american manufacturers and thomas register catalog file asia: asia’s 7500 largest companies, dun’s asia/pacific key business enterprises, dunn’s market guide: small to medium businesses in hong kong, japan trade directory, standard trade index of japan europe: europe’s 15000 largest companies, kelly’s business directory, principal international businesses: the world marketing directory, the times 1000: leading companies in britain and overseas cd-roms: canadian business & current affairs, compact disclosure canada, compustat pc plus corporate text lexis/nexis online information retrieval system microfiche: canadian companies annual report service (insider), cancorp: canadian corporate financials government publications off campus public libraries chamber of commerce information interviews contacting company directly for information internet—you may wish to start with career services home page at http://www.careerservices.uwaterloo.ca networking: developing leads and making contacts networking is making connections with individuals and groups of people, and can be accomplished by personal meetings, through the telephone or fax, on paper, or via the internet. this section will help you whether you are looking for a job as an employee of a company or organization, or whether you are looking for work as an independent contractor or freelancer. networking contacts can help you locate job opportunities in both the visible and hidden job markets. it is estimated that 65-90% of jobs are found through networking. an informal survey among your employed friends would reveal that many, if not most, found employment this way. you can't begin networking, however, until you have defined the type of work you want. interviews to help you decide on potential careers are called information interviews and should not be confused with networking interviews. getting the two straight in your mind may be difficult. if you have reviewed both of these principles and are still a little unsure, please speak to someone in career services. networking can bring many benefits to the job seeker. individuals who find employment in this manner tend to be more satisfied in their job and earn a higher income. steering away from the advertised market has other advantages too since it often over represents lowly paid/unskilled or highly paid/highly skilled positions. most people find work somewhere in between these two extremes. secondly, the advertised market can be deceiving since many jobs there are non-existent or already filled (by avid networkers) before being printed. lastly, the qualifications listed in such ads can be significantly higher than the requirements of the job before being advertised. overcoming reluctance to liaise knowing someone on the inside establishing a network operating efficiently and effectively telephone strategies georgraphic considerations using the internet networking myths follow up overcoming reluctance to liaise networking means making many contacts. it is nothing more complicated than that. some of you may find the idea of networking, initiating contacts, and speaking with strangers a daunting task. you do not need to put yourself in the difficult position of asking everyone for a job. what you would like to accomplish instead is the establishing and maintaining of relationships which are mutually beneficial, with you helping others achieve their goals as they help you achieve yours. be a good listener and reflect on the information you get. have a genuine reason to speak with a person, since having to generate "small talk" may add to your discomfort. then when chatting with strangers about their interests and yours, your enthusiasm will help you conquer your nervousness. volunteering is one way to develop relationships and have people get to know you and your talents. you may need to work on your body language, including your voice and eye contact, in order to project capability and confidence. deal with the aspects of networking that you dislike the most by analyzing what they are and coming up with an action plan to overcome them. when is your energy the highest? are you a morning person? that is the time to undertake the tasks that require the most energy from you. always build time into your schedule to relax and become refreshed by doing whatever activity you enjoy. sometimes it is necessary to do what you must, even though it’s the last thing you want to do, e.g., make a phone call to arrange a meeting. most people are nervous when tackling something new or are unsure about the outcome. yes, there is an element of risk. but when you are successful, e.g., the meeting is arranged, your self-confidence grows. with repetition, your skill level increases too. in time you’ll come to believe that you can handle whatever needs to be done. you have expanded your comfort zone! knowing someone on the inside managers trust people they know more than people they don't. from the employer's viewpoint, it makes sense to hire a "known quantity", someone who has been recommended by a person who is known and trusted. employers also reduce their recruiting costs in this way. employers like to have referrals from their own employees. people who hear about the job from insiders eliminate themselves if they feel the job would be a poor fit or if they don’t have the skills. the applicant’s resume therefore seems to be more tailored to the qualifications of the job. the person appears neither under- nor over-qualified for the position. the timing is better. therefore, if you know someone inside a company you would like to apply to, it may be possible for you to get information on what to include in your resume and when to submit it. contacts inside the organization can also keep your name in people’s minds. with e-mail, it is easy to stay in touch. establishing a network the great thing about networking is that you already have a network in place. consider all of the people you know personally (e.g., uncle), or come in contact with regularly (e.g., dentist), or briefly (e.g., person next to you in supermarket checkout line). the following list may help you to get started: friends relatives neighbours (current & past) other students, day or night classes acquaintances (sports, clubs, social activities, etc.) uw alumni professors co-workers & former co-workers former employers business people (bank manager, insurance agent, etc.) professionals (doctor, lawyer, dentist, etc.) religious groups (clergy, members) politicians (all levels) members of professional organization(s) people at conferences, trade shows, etc. chamber of commerce speak also with people you meet anywhere, e.g., during theatre intermission, at a sports event, on the beach or ski hill, in the airplane. when you are next at a gathering, make a point of talking to at least 2 new people. start with someone standing alone. perhaps they too wish they could meet and mingle with people more easily. now make a list in the box of the names of 20 people you know. consider the names you have just written. do these contacts have a) hiring authority (could hire you for the work you want), b) job leads (have knowledge of the industry in general, ideas on how to approach people, skills required) or c) ability to refer you to others (may not know field but have many contacts in general)? label the names with a, b or c. don't worry if you don't have very many a's on your list. most people don't. your b's and c's will refer you to the a's. put a "*" beside the names that are in or may have knowledge of the geographical area in which you prefer to work. your approach is very important. if the people you are contacting do not have hiring authority, don't scare them off by asking them for a job. they still have valuable information to share, including names of other contacts in the industry who may have such authority. practice! practice! practice! first, begin with a small group of people you know well. ask those willing to help you to critique your approach. networking is not just handing out your business card and requesting assistance. networking is reciprocal. it’s learning about others and how you can be of service to them. networking is being friendly in a genuine way. listening is the key to effective networking. if you spend most of your time asking questions about your contacts and building good rapport, they will eventually turn the conversation around to you. then you can let people know what you need, and perhaps even what particular goal you want to accomplish. explain what it means to you. pose open-ended questions. "who do you know who.." is better than "do you know anyone who" which can be answered with yes or no. example: "i just read that abc co. is planning an expansion into southport city to begin a new line of widgets. in a recent project, i did some research on "x" and accomplished "y" in my last job. i would be very interested in contributing to the start-up of their new line and getting it competitively launched. who do you know who may know someone currently working at abc company?" you can present your skills and abilities assertively, without being loud or pushy. second, compile a list of people you know who have jobs in the field you are interested in. contact each person and suggest that you meet for coffee (or something equally as brief). up front, let them know that you are not looking for a job with them or from them. you are seeking their expert advice. when you meet, again, don’t ask for a job. you may want to ask for recommendations on what they would do if they were you, where they see opportunities in the field, who could advise you about potential areas, and with whom you could speak about what might be coming up in the future. try to get an introduction to the next person you could talk with. perhaps you could get 2-3 referrals from a contact you know quite well and has no hesitation in referring you. from others, listen carefully while they speak. if they talk about a company or organization that seems promising, ask if they have suggestions as to whom you could speak with. then phone your new leads. tell them where you got their names (only when you have permission from your contact to do so). ask for 15 minutes of their time. suggest meeting for coffee near their office. however, they may prefer to have you go to their office. your agenda, as before, is to learn about the other person. by finding out about your networking contacts’ interests, you can be of service to them. if you see an article or hear about something that might interest them, you can pass it along, and in the process renew your association. if you give leads, you will get leads, even though they may not come from the same people you have given them to. if you manage your network well, you will know who can benefit from your business and personal contacts. hopefully you will be remembered when something does come up in your line of work. through the particular information you receive on organizations, work specifics, and candidates’ qualifications, you will be in an excellent position to speak with hiring managers. you will have a competitive advantage when you present the contribution you can make. with a good "fit" and your enthusiasm for the work, the managers will be more interested in speaking with you. third, talk to the heads of departments or organizations where you want to work. begin with organizations low on your priority list to gain experience. it can be quite difficult to get to the person who hires because of the people who screen calls (e.g., secretary, receptionist, assistant). it is important to work with them. fully identify yourself immediately, as gatekeepers are generally skeptical of people appearing to hide something. if you are asked, let them know why the manager would benefit speaking with you. be sincere. be confident and assertive, but treat everyone with respect. build rapport. don’t appear to be schmoozing. ask for the name of the people screening so that you can use it on subsequent calls when they answer the phone. ask questions. show that you want to learn about their needs. the more information you have, the better off you will be when you speak with the manager. you may also want to try phoning early in the morning, over the lunch hour, later in the day, when the manager may be answering his/her own phone. when you try to reach a hiring manager and are transferred to someone else within the organization, use the opportunity to develop another contact. don't know what to say? possible openings: "considering a career in...", "given your name by...", "understand that your organization is a leader in..." or "heard that you have been working in the area of..." request: stress that you are seeking job information and not a job from that person. ask to meet to discuss job search techniques and appropriateness of your resume. mention that you realize the person is busy and would only take 20-30 minutes at a mutually convenient time. when you do meet with the hiring manager, define in depth what contributions you can make to the organization. what makes you better than all the other people who would be considered for a position? think in terms of what the organization is looking for. every day, try to meet personally with at least two people who hire even if there is no job opening at that time. create a good first impression with appropriate dress and grooming, excellent interpersonal and communication skills, and sincere enthusiasm. operating efficiently and effectively create a work schedule: research to do, phone calls to make, letters to write, and meetings to attend. if you can, prepare your list of the next day’s activities the night before. when you get up in the morning, you are then able to begin work right away. keep records of people you are trying to, and did, reach. p=phoned. l=sent letter. e=sent e-mail message. v=left voice mail message. f=sent fax. m=arranged meeting. c=completed follow-up. add the date on which each activity happened. keep all your information about your networking contacts in the small notebook or diary you began when conducting your information interviews. when you are speaking with anyone, note what their interests are, what they want, and how you can be of service. add to your diary their name, address, phone, fax, e-mail, plus any other relevant information you have learned about them or from them. by having the details readily available, you may be able to help someone. carry the diary with you all the time. you will always know the status of each contact, and can follow up even when you are not at your desk. when you need to leave a voice mail message, in under 30 seconds give complete information about who you are and why you called. make sure the greeting on your answering machine is business-like. if you are not sure about the reliability of others taking a phone message for you, you may want to consider adding a second phone line with a professional answering service. if the type of work you are looking for means that employers need to get in touch with you quickly when you are away from your phone, consider wearing a beeper so that you can return calls very promptly. telephone strategies in addition to speaking with people in person, the telephone can be an efficient way for you to collect information from people who can make suggestions on what jobs are or will be available in the hidden job market and the hiring qualifications. initially you may find using the telephone intimidating, with the result that the person you are speaking with senses your lack of confidence. preparation is the key. the words you say (the script) will need to be well thought out. your voice needs some practice to warm up before you begin conversation. so much of the meaning of your message is communicated by the way you speak over the phone, rather than by the actual words you use. tape-record yourself giving a 3 to 5 minute presentation. do you have a pleasing tone? are you talking at the right speed for the listener? are all the words clearly and easily heard? do you put emphasis on words or ideas that are more important to catch the listener’s attention? did you notice some habits that will cause the listener to become distracted? do you have a liberal sprinkling of verbal fillers such as ummm, ahhh, like, you know, etc.? are you using the fillers to give you time to think? instead, be silent while you think. do you raise your voice at the end of the sentence even though you are not asking a question? although the listener cannot see your body language, you need to be just as careful as though you were meeting face-to-face. sitting in a business-like manner will help you maintain professionalism. smiling will help you to become more relaxed and project a more positive attitude. show enthusiasm and be polite. checklist of what i do well checklist of what i need to improve based on your research, prepare a list of potential contacts and prioritize them. begin making your phone calls to those names at the bottom of the list so that you will be experienced and confident when you get to those most important to you. after you select the person to phone, prepare a written list of questions that you plan to ask. make sure though that you don’t ask for information that you could have located through a publicly available source such as a directory or web page. speak initially with people who are currently working with a potential employer, not the hiring manager, but people in that department (or in other areas) so that you can get helpful details to tailor your application to the employer’s needs. when you get the person on the phone, identify yourself and mention how you found out about the organization. since you will need some of their time to answer questions, ask if they have a moment now or if they would prefer you to call later. don’t mention that you are looking for a job. they can too easily brush you off with, "there’s nothing available." you first need to find out if there is a fit between you and the organization. ask open-ended questions about non-confidential or non-proprietary information and terminology. if it is appropriate, you could request the name and title of the person who hires. ensure that you get the right spelling. if you don’t know whether it is a male or female name, ask. since you are inquiring about the field of work generally and that company specifically, you may also ask if there is anyone else you should speak to about finding other opportunities in the area you want to work in. you will need to keep good records of the information received and names of other people mentioned, as well as any terminology/vocabulary used to describe the work. add the date of your phone call and what follow up you need to do. if you need to get back to a person again, begin your conversation by jogging the person’s memory of what you talked about the last time. if you get a voice mail recording when trying to reach a contact, know what you want to say. if you are unprepared, hang up and call again later. the message needs to interest them in wanting to speak with you. if you want them to call you back, let them know the best time to reach you. repeat your phone number again at the end so that they do not have to go back through your message to find it. however, you may be wasting your time waiting for the phone to ring. it may be preferable for you to say that you will get back to the person. then keep trying until you do. geographical considerations looking for a job in a geographical location where you currently do not reside is a major task. begin by subscribing to a local newspaper and checking out the area on the internet. job hunting is best done in the location you want to work in. however, you may find it more economically feasible to make some phone contacts before travelling to your preferred location. if the time zone is different from yours, be sure to call at a favourable time to them. a long-distance calling plan may help you to reduce the costs of many long distance charges. for contacts, try alumni or business associations in the area. set your dates for a trip there. write and telephone to arrange meetings. finish the rest of your job search in that location. the hiring manager may be more willing to meet with you as the company would not have to pay your travel expenses. when there is a job opening, employers are more inclined to interview "local" people who meet their qualifications. it would be helpful for you therefore to have an address and phone number from the location you wish to move to, so that you can include it on your business card, in your resumes and letters, etc. perhaps you know someone in the area who would give you permission to use his/her address and phone number, as well as pass along messages to you. you may want to consider getting a 1-800 number or inviting people to call you collect. it may be in your best interests not to relocate permanently to another community until you’re sure of employment. using the internet the internet is a great source of information on the job market and on specific companies and organizations. investigate relevant employment news and discussion groups. members are very supportive of each other and most are willing to help answer questions. honour the rules established by the group. don’t just lurk—participate! with hundreds or thousands of readers, you have an easy way to network. if you look only at advertised positions on the internet, you will miss the vast majority of openings. asking for help on the internet can result in assistance or annoyed feedback, depending on how you phrase your request. if you are not sure how to use the many resources, ask a professional to explain. as with in-person or telephone conversations, don’t ask for information you could find on your own through printed or other sources. ask the right person the right question. if you want help from a discussion group on the internet, look for their archives or faq (frequently asked questions) section first because your answer may be there. when submitting a question, write in complete sentences with good grammar and no words that people from other cultures may not understand. mention that their assistance or suggestions would be appreciated. offer to compile the replies you receive and pass them back to the group. etiquette dictates that you should ask people to help you find information rather than give you the information. make sure your name and e-mail address are available at the bottom for people to get back to you. thank each person who replies to you. job searching is the same online as off. be professional in your writing, in contacting employers through e-mail, and in following up on contacts you make as well as requests made by employers. if you wish to terminate contact with an employer because you are no longer interested in that job or organization, send another e-mail, thanking the employer for any consideration given to you, and declining further interviews (or whatever stage you are at). keep their goodwill: you may want to initiate contact again in the future. networking myths (1) myth: do not network where there is an advertised position. send a resume. reality: you must take additional action to set yourself apart from the other candidates. visit or phone to assist your application. (2) myth: approach networking strictly as a job search tool. reality: people who cannot hire you also have valuable information to share. keep up your contacts after your job search too. keep on good terms for future. try to help your contacts where possible. networking is a two-way street! (3) myth: join many associations and hand out as many resumes as you can at meetings. reality: do join one or two associations that you really have an interest in. then, participate in meetings and take on assignments. show the other members what you can do, that you have the skills you indicate on your resume. once these people see your skills, they will be more likely to want to recommend you. follow-up remember that follow-up is critical. when you are given a referral, be sure you follow up promptly. otherwise you will disappoint two people, the person who gave the name and the person who is waiting for your call. thank-you letters are very important. take the opportunity to thank everyone who helped you. people who gave you contact names and people that you got more in-depth information from should both receive letters. in your letter, be brief and sincere. you may handwrite the note if you feel that you now know the person fairly well. if you have received some good tips on changing your resume, do mention in your letter that you will forward your revised resume soon (try to include at least one of their suggestions). upon accepting a job (yippee!) contact those in your network who assisted you and/or are referring you to others. they need to know to stop searching on your behalf. sample job search resources in career services allen, jeffery g. the perfect follow-up method to get the job. toronto, on: john wiley and sons inc. 1992. bolles, richard nelson. the what color is your parachute? berkeley, ca: ten speed press. ceolin, david. the idea guide: the step-by-step guide for planning and starting your own business. toronto, on: envision communications. 1995. chin-lee, cynthia. it’s who you know. toronto, on: pfeiffer. 1993. cote, francois. the student guide to job hunting: paths to success. peterborough, on: broadview press. 1993. easto, larry. how to succeed in your own home business. willowdale, on: homebusiness press. 1993. easto, larry and reg pirie. from learning to earning: a student’s guide to landing the right job. toronto, on: doubleday. 1996. figler, howard. the complete job-search handbook. new york, ny: fitzhenry and whiteside. 1988. hachey, jean-marc. the canadian guide to working and living overseas. ottawa, on: intercultural systems. 1995. larson, jackie & cheri comstock. the new rules of the job search game: why today’s managers hire ... and why they don’t. holbrook, ma: bob adams, inc. 1994. kennedy, joyce l. hook up, get hired! toronto, on: john wiley & sons. 1995. kennedy, joyce & thomas j. morrow. electronic job search revolution. toronto, on: john wiley & sons. 1994. krannich, ronald l. and caryl rae krannich. network your way to job and career success. manassas, va: impact publications. 1989. royal bank. your business matters: starting out right. 1990. royal bank. your business matters: the source book. 1990. weaver, mike & odd de presna. the online world: how to profit from the information superhighway. toronto, on: product publications. 1994. woods, donald & shirley d. ormerod. networking: how to enrich your life and get things done. toronto, on: pfeiffer. 1993. after you have decided which job(s) and company(ies) or organization(s) you would like to apply to, you will be able to start working on your resume because you know who the reader will be and what criteria will be used to screen applications.