10.3 osap 10.3 ontario student assistance program (osap) if you rely on osap funding, you are required to apply for osap assistance each term you need it. osap does not normally cover you for the entire academic year. if your co-op program requires a two term academic period, you can apply for the entire eight months providing it falls within the osap program year (september to august each year). new applications are available each year around early may. interest on outstanding canada and ontario student loans is applied immediately following your withdrawal from full-time studies or graduation. inform your bank that you are returning to class on each academic term; this must be done within six months of your last study period to maintain your interest-free status. this can be done by either producing a new loan document or a schedule 2 and/or form r. further information regarding your obligations and repayment of your loans can be obtained from your bank. during your period of study at the university of waterloo, you may be required to do an eight month work term. if you have outstanding ontario student loan(s), you should be aware that this loan remains interest-free and non-payable for a six month period only following a full- or part-time study term. you are required during the seventh and eighth month to consolidate your ontario student loans, and to make two monthly payments until you return to your studies. upon presentation of a new ontario student loan document or a form r to your bank, you regain non-payment, interest-free status. the canada student loan program now recognizes an approved co-op work term as an integral part of your studies. therefore, you may obtain a schedule 2 to verify your registration in a co-op work term from the registrar's office during your second consecutive work period. we do not recommend that you obtain the schedule 2, unless absolutely necessary, as it may preclude you from receiving loan assistance for future studies. effective august 1, 1995, canada student loan funding (including completion of a schedule 2 for interest-free status) is limited to 340 weeks of assistance. example: program length in weeks undergraduate 170 masters 100 phd 150 total 420 in this example you will not be eligible for funding past your first year in a phd program. should you change your program, withdraw, or fail, the weeks that you were enrolled are used in the total calculation of the 340 weeks of assistance. it is your responsibility to request the completion of a schedule 2 during your second consecutive co-op work term and you must deliver it to your bank prior to the first day of the seventh month of your work term. for further information regarding osap, contact the student awards office, 2nd floor, needles hall or call (519) 888-4567, extension 3583.