engineering supplement faculty of engineering supplement to work report writing for first year students all engineering students are required to write a work report on their first work term. the subject matter will depend on the circumstance of the job. details of the work report requirements are contained in your student manual. students who obtain a job read the information on "work reports - first year engineering students" below. students without work have two choices approach a company of your choice and ask if you can write a report for them. who knows, if you do a good job, the company may hire you. research a topic of your own choice. information may be gathered from technical libraries or from companies specializing in the subject matter you are interested in. in doing this, however, no one will get the benefits outlined on the attached information on work reports . n.b.: researching a work report topic is an option that is available only to first year students writing their first work report unless it is cleared in advance with the associate undergraduate chair of the appropriate department. work reports - first year engineering students always discuss the topic with your supervisor. don't take on the burden of selecting this yourself. you will benefit if you appeal to the employer's selfish motives i.e., tell your supervisor you must write a work report and that it must be analytical, i.e., it must have an identifiable analytical content and must relate to the job, (a significant effort of 2000 - 4000 words of discussion, i.e., body of report, is expected). speak to your supervisor about 3 - 4 weeks after the start of the term. call your field co-ordinator, the co-ordinator listed for your employer's location, if you have any problems with getting this done. benefits to you you do not have to identify the topic you will likely be introduced to resource people who can help you with data and information necessary to write the report you will likely get time during the day to do the report. this is not guaranteed, however, but is more likely to happen if employers know the report will be of value to them you will have the satisfaction of knowing your report will be used by the company you will likely be able to get typing or word processing support you will have a document you will be proud to show future employers if it is not confidential benefits to employers they get a document that is of value to them if the report shows a way of saving time, money or improves efficiency, the employer will realize how cost effective hiring a co-op student can be benefits to the university when employers think of hiring students they will favourably consider waterloo students because they offer a bonus of the work report waterloo develops a reputation for providing high standard reports remember you must leave a copy of the work report with your employer