7.10 two work term commitment 7.10 two work term opportunity many students assume that changing jobs every term gives the broadest range of experience. changing jobs gives you the most variety of experience -- but variety does not always equate to depth of experience. please keep the following points in mind when starting your work term: it is to your advantage to learn as much as possible during your work term. decide what you want to learn and what type of experience you want before you begin the work term. have a meeting with your department head or supervisor to clarify your goals and objectives. clarify expectations regarding your work. learn how your work fits the rest of the department or company. find out about other groups or departments in the company. could you work in a different part of the company on your next work term? have meetings with your supervisor to discuss your progress. ask for feedback and discuss options for your next work term. when considering your options for your next work term remember: work experience includes a variety of technical assignments, analysis, and problem solving. your current employer is more likely to provide this experience than a new employer. most people prefer to work with somebody they know. if you are active, you have a better chance of being given more responsibility. if an employer cannot confirm your second work term by the beginning of the job posting period, you are not required to return. if the employer confirms the second work term before you begin the job application process and you wish to return, consult with the appropriate field co-ordinator immediately. commitment for two work terms you are obligated to return to an employer for your next scheduled second work term if this this was stated by the employer in the job description (when you applied for the position) or in the interview. students who do not honour a two work term commitment may be recorded as failed work term or on own - university imposed. 7.10.1 failing an academic term and the two work term commitment please consult your co-op program administrator for information on co-op related consequences of failing an academic term and how this might affect your ability to return to an employer for the next work term. your faculty advisor can give you information on the academic consequences of failing an academic term.