9.1 report guidelines 9.1 faculty-specific guidelines please click your faculty and/or discipline for details. please note that not all faculties/disciplines have details on-line and so do not have a link to follow for more information. applied health sciences health studies kinesiology recreation hand in your work report to your department. your work report is marked by: a grad student for the 1st and 2nd reports a faculty member for the 3rd and 4th reports a faculty member or field co-ordinator for confidential reports a secondary evaluation by your employer is strongly recommended, but not mandatory use the applied health sciences report guidelines instead of the ones in this chapter. follow the link on the title "applied health sciences" above. arts please speak to the faculty undergraduate advisor of your major (or intended major) before leaving campus about potential work report topics, formats, etc. some disciplines provide on-line guidelines. click on the name of the discipline (if highlighted) for more information. accounting anthropology (non-applied studies) applied studies economics (non-applied studies) english (non-applied studies) french teaching specialization political science (non-applied studies) psychology (non-applied studies) sociology (non-applied studies) engineering please note that, with the exception of those in electrical and computer engineering, all other engineering students writing their first work report must use the work report guidelines shown here in the following sections of chapter 9 of the cecs co-op student reference manual. if you are an engineering student writing your 2nd, 3rd, or 4th work report or an electrical and computer engineering student writing your 1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th work report, please be sure to click on  the name of your plan below and follow your department's work report instructions. be sure to review the two links immediately following this sentence as they contain critical information. work report credit, submission, and confidential report information work report writing for first year students chemical and environmental chemical engineering no additional information available. use cecs report guidelines in this chapter. civil engineering computer engineering electrical engineering environmental (civil) engineering mechanical engineering software engineering (see separate listing below) systems design engineering geological engineering environmental studies architecture - work report guidelines are currently available only in paper copy from the architecture undergrad office. environment and resource studies geography urban and regional planning no additional information available. use cecs report guidelines in this chapter. mathematics all math programs (software engineering: see separate listing below) use mathematics report guidelines instead of the ones in this chapter. follow the link on the title "mathematics" above. software engineering use software engineering report guidelines instead of the ones in this chapter. follow the link on the title "software engineering" above. science biotechnology/chartered accountancy all other science programs: no additional information available. use cecs report guidelines in this chapter. teaching option reports written during fall practicum at queen's are not due until students return to uw.