cecs [ students | access - telnet version ] your browser does not support script what is access? access is an on-line application designed to provide information to students taking part in the job application and interview process. how do i get an account for access? cecs will automatically create an access account for you if you are a co-op student and have informed the department of your intention to participate in the interview process for the upcoming work term. graduating students must register for an account. alumni register for an account by joining the e-community on the alumni website. regular students looking for part-time, summer jobs or ontario work placement jobs can register for an account by going to the getting hired  section of the career services website. how to log on to access: go to http://www.coop.uwaterloo.ca. choose "student access" from the options displayed. to improve performance, please clean your browser cache. when you are ready to log in to the application, type in your userid (up to but excluding the @ symbol) as it appears in uwdir. for example, the login for xyz@uwaterloo.ca would be xyz. please make sure that you enter your userid in lower case. your default password is your uwdir password. (i.e. your quest password). to obtain or reset your password visit ego.uwaterloo.ca/~uwdir/. the following is a brief overview of access main features: 1. job search this section allows you to search for jobs that meet a set of criteria. select the criteria from a pre-determined list. when access executes your query, it will generate a list of jobs. navigate to view the job descriptions that interest you. co-op students should try different plan codes, since a search for jobs listed under the faculty heading will not return jobs listed under a plan heading. for example, a search for general engineering (gen e) will not return jobs advertised under the plan heading civil engineering (civ e). graduating students, alumni and regular students should search by faculty headings only. 2. applications (for co-op students) "applications" allows you to view a list of all the jobs you have applied to and their current status. applications usually appear two days after the posting expiry date. you may also navigate to view job details and job descriptions. "yes" indicates that you have been granted the interview. you can check under "interviews" to see when your interview will take place, but this won't be available until two days prior to date of the interview. 3. interviews "interviews" allows you to see your interview schedule, employers' special instructions (comments), and the names of the students who will be interviewed for the same position. the schedule will show up in the "interviews" section two days prior to the date of the interview. 4. rankings this option allows you to check whether or not you have been ranked for or offered a position. hours of operation access shuts down for data updates sometime between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. check the system early each morning for last-minute changes, especially during interviews. access doesn't always have up-to-the-minute information. always visit needles hall the afternoon before your interview to check the next interview schedule. access difficulties? if you are having a problem with using access, help is available from 8:30 a.m.- 4:30 p.m. weekdays by: e-mailing cecshelp@admmail.uwaterloo.ca visiting the cecs web site: http://cecs.uwaterloo.ca/students/access/index.htm