7.9 intellectual property 7.9 intellectual property 7.9.1 what is intellectual property? intellectual property (ip) concerns the creation of a knowledge-based product. you cannot "own" ideas in your head: they must in a tangible form, such as drawings, reports, plans, or specifications. then they become intellectual property, and are protected by laws. 7.9.2 application of ip university of waterloo policy 73 states that intellectual property created in the course of teaching and research belongs to the creator. therefore, if you help to produce a knowledge-based product (for example, a research project with your professor), you are part owner of that property. policy 73 applies when you are working on campus as a co-op student, and when you are a student at the university. this policy, however, does not apply when students are working as employees on work-terms at organizations other than uw. when you work off-campus, your employers have their own policies concerning intellectual property. employers may ask you to assign patent rights to them for something that you have created or helped to create. 7.9.3 recognizing contributors regardless of who owns the intellectual property, contributors should receive appropriate recognition. reports or drawings prepared by students should include the student’s name on the documents. note that for some items (such as technical manuals, software or advertising copy) it may be impractical for the creator to be identified. in the particular case of patents, the creator must always be identified, even if the ownership is assigned to someone else. if a student invents something during a work term and the employer patents it, the student is named as the inventor, but the employer typically owns the invention and the resulting patent. this general rule also applies to copyright. 7.9.4 contracts take care to define intellectual property rights when you are hired. the employment contract is the best place to specify ownership of intellectual property developed during employment. in many engineering firms, employees sign a contract giving all intellectual property rights to the employer. in addition, many contracts include a non-disclosure agreement: you may not discuss any information that is not publicly known, during or after a work term.  it is very important for you to read ip agreements carefully; if something is unclear, ask or seek independent counsel. 7.9.5 exceptional cases you may develop an invention privately while working on an employer's invention during the day. disclose this information and have the private invention specifically excluded from the employment contract. failure to do so may lead to conflict later. if you are already employed and did not mention a potential conflict of interest, speak to a lawyer. the conflict could be interpreted as breach of company confidentiality or as theft of intellectual property. 7.9.6 ip at the university of waterloo uw policy 73 pertains to all students and university staff, including co-op students (unless otherwise stipulated by the employer and the university). the policy states that ownership of ip rights for the products of teaching and research activities belongs to the creator(s) of these activities, with three important exceptions: the university normally retains ownership of ip rights in works created as 'assigned tasks' in the course of administrative activities. owners of ip rights in scholarly works created in the course of teaching and research activities grant the university a non-exclusive, free, irrevocable license to copy and/or use such works in other teaching and research activities, but excluding licensing and distribution to persons or organizations outside the university community. any such licensing and/or distribution activity would be authorized only by an additional license from the owner(s). in sponsored or contract research activities, ownership of ip rights may be determined in whole or in part by the regulations of the sponsor or the terms of the contract. participants in these research activities must be made aware of any such stipulations of the contract by the principal investigator, that is, the leader of the research project. 7.9.7 your rights you are covered by and have recourse to the relevant legislation and law concerning copyright and patents, such as the canadian patent and copyright acts. students who are not canadian citizens or who are not ordinarily resident in an international copyright convention country may not be protected under canadian copyright law. 7.9.8 acknowledgements: thanks to gordon andrews, associate chair, mechanical engineering, university of waterloo for assistance with this section. g.c. andrews and h.c. ratz, introduction to professional engineering. university of waterloo bookstore, 1997. 5th ed. ch. 17 j.d. weir and s.a. ellis, critical concepts of canadian business law. addison wesley, 1997. ch. 14