8.1 reminders 8.1 reminders for co-op students on the work term during your first few weeks of employment, you are going to go through orientation and probation. if you are not getting feedback from your employer, ask for it. take advantage of the feedback to learn how you can improve your performance on the job. week 1 or 2 after discussing your supervisor's expectations for the term, set and write down achievable and measurable goals or objectives.  see section 6 of this publication for more on learning objectives. week 4 discuss your work report with your supervisor.  if your work assignment does not lend itself to a related topic for a work report you should decide on your own topic.  your field co-ordinator could provide you with some advice on subjects if required. when producing a work report not assigned by your supervisor, check with him/her in advance to determine if any time might be available to you on the job to prepare it. (be familiar with the work report guidelines for your program). if your employer has not already set a date, make an appointment to discuss your evaluation and your objectives.  if you feel you would like your own copy of the completed evaluation, arrange with your supervisor to supply you with a photocopy at this time. § the field co-ordinator work site visit where possible, your field co-ordinator will visit you on the job during the term to discuss your work with you and your supervisor.  visits can occur during the second, third or fourth month of the term. § help? if you have questions or problems prior to or after your field co-ordinator visit, do not hesitate to telephone cecs at 888-4026. week 5 review your objectives and rewrite them if necessary to reflect changes in expectations or circumstances. week 9 encourage your supervisor to review the employer's evaluation form that grades your performance for the term and discuss any areas of concern he/she may have about your work to date.  this will help you to know where you stand and will give you an opportunity to improve in areas that you may be weak in. week 13 complete the first draft of your work report.  complete the final copy of the work report before the end of the term. students in mathematics must present their work reports to their employers for technical evaluation as well as to the university for a final evaluation.  students in applied health sciences must present their work reports to their employers for evaluation as well as a copy to the university. confirm with your supervisor your availability for a second work term.  you are expected to return if you are invited back by your employer. week 15 remember, you are expected to return to the job for a second work term (if the employer has a job for you.  this decision is not normally made by the supervisor, but rather by the person who is the company's contact with the university, e.g., human resources. if you will be returning you should discuss the following things before you leave: salary position you will have when you return who you will be working for when you will report also, leave an address or means by which the employer may contact you during the school term. if you will be going through interviews next term, revise your  résumé to reflect the experience gained on this work term. arrange to have the résumé typed, word processed, or printed before you return to campus (if you do plan to go through interviews). § return-to-campus check the bulletin boards for your return-to-campus interview with your field co-ordinator.  these interviews are normally scheduled to take place the first week of lectures.  it is crucial that you make your intentions known to the department at this meeting as to what you will be doing for the next work term.  an interview with your field co-ordinator must take place if you expect to take part in the job application process. try to have your résumés ready by this time. send a letter or memo of thanks to the appropriate person (be sure to send a copy to the people in personnel for your file and confirm all arrangements for the next work term if you are returning.