7.5 workplace safety & insurance 7.5 workplace safety & insurance workplace safety & insurance is a no-fault accident insurance system for work-related injuries or illness. the workplace safety & insurance act covers many, but not all, workplaces in ontario. as a student worker you can expect benefits, providing your employer pays workplace safety & insurance premiums. workplace safety & insurance coverage starts on the first day of your work term. as soon as you go on the payroll your earnings are declared to the workplace safety & insurance board. your employer pays all of the premiums. if you are injured or become ill on the job, you will be paid 85% of your net average earnings, under current regulations. the maximum payment changes periodically. medical aid costs are also covered. if you are hired under contract through the university of waterloo, the university's liability insurance and workplace safety & insurance cover you. should you be injured on the job your employer must fill out form 7 and you must sign it. by signing the form, you authorize the release of your medical information. if there is a delay in reporting to the workplace safety & insurance board, the employer is penalized. it is imperative that you report workplace injuries to your employer immediately. if you claim benefits, inform your field co-ordinator as soon as possible. 7.5.1 unpaid work term employment an unpaid work term may count as a credit. co-op students working in this situation are considered "unpaid learners" by the ministry of education and training (met) and are eligible for compensation in the event of a workplace injury. any compensation associated with such an injury is covered in its entirety by the met or itt hartford. employers will not incur any costs for workplace safety insurance board (wsib) claims. jobs with employers under the wsib act are covered by the wsib. for employers outside of the wsib act, met has an insurance policy with itt hartford. the met guidelines for "unpaid learners" apply to students when: the employment is authorized by a uw faculty/department, and the student participates, however minimally, in the activities of the co-op employer's industry unpaid learners include university students on a training term with an employer as a formal part of the course or program. however, university students who do unpaid research as part of their program are not considered unpaid learners. field co-ordinators must be made aware of any unpaid work terms and documentation for work term credit completed. should you acquire a job off campus for which you will receive work term credit but no financial remuneration, please inform the cecs contracts administrator (nh 1012, or extension 6062). this enables cecs to make contact with the company on your behalf. students working on campus as unpaid learners should contact sandi hurlburt, human resources dept. (extension 6120).