cecs [ about cecs | co-op field co-ordinators - 416 team ] your browser does not support script field co-ordinators work in specific geographic territories and are not normally on campus. if you wish to contact a co-op field co-ordinator and this person is not on campus, you may call or e-mail. for immediate attention, please contact your co-op advisor. 416 - metro toronto initials co-ordinator telephone number e-mail leb larry baker (905) 474-9706 lebaker@uwaterloo.ca kb katherine belrose (905) 789-9930 belrose@uwaterloo.ca nkc nancy chiang (416) 224-5728 nchiang@uwaterloo.ca hc hazel craig (416) 208-6964 hjcraig@uwaterloo.ca phd peter dennis (905) 771-1543 phdennis@uwaterloo.ca dbe david everest (905) 465-1258 deverest@uwaterloo.ca meg margaret grosch (905) 702-1590 mgrosch@uwaterloo.ca azk alnoor karsan (905) 889-5588 akarsan@uwaterloo.ca dk doreen knol (416) 621-8510 dknol@uwaterloo.ca jvl joan lam (905) 944-1397 jvlam@uwaterloo.ca rp ruth parker (416) 485-7909 ruthp@uwaterloo.ca wm wendy moore (416) 421-9298 wmoore@uwaterloo.ca larry baker, with a basc and a masc degree in electrical engineering from uw and with marketing and management experience at ibm, provides solid technical and business background as a field co-ordinator for engineering students. he spent three years as a business instructor at both seneca and centennial college. katherine belrose studied dance at york university and earned a ba in economics from the university of ottawa. in addition to working as a fund raiser for several cultural organizations, she spent five years as a co-operative education co-ordinator at concordia university and was the information officer for the protestant school board of greater montreal for four years, managing the board's media relations. katherine now assists uw students secure it and business co-op terms in toronto. nancy chiang's area of specialization is mathematics. she attended york university for her ba degree, majoring in french and minoring in english. she received her masters in education at the university of hong kong and taught both at the high school and polytechnic level in hong kong, teaching mainly english and communication to engineering students. hazel craig graduated from the university of waterloo with a ba in honours recreation and leisure studies. prior to her role as a field co-ordinator she held positions with canadian outward bound wilderness school and other therapeutic recreation settings. hazel brings a valuable perspective to her role as co-ordinator having been a co-op student as an undergrad. her primary focus is in the area of applied health sciences. peter dennis, b.comm., b.ed., m.b.a., has a background in both business and education. he is a past president of the richmond hill chamber of commerce, the windsor and district personnel association, and the ontario chapter of the international graphoanalysis society. peter has worked as a college professor, high school teacher, public speaker, handwriting analyst, personal coach, management consultant and as a human resources executive with major business organizations including a ten-year term with one of canada's largest ca firms. david everest received his bachelor of arts degree in english and philosophy from mcmaster university and his masters degree in language and professional writing from the university of waterloo. he coordinates employment for all faculties, but specializes in arts and business. in the past, he has been employed as an advertising executive, college professor, high school teacher, golf instructor, oil rig "roughneck", and steel worker. he is a member of the canadian association for cooperative education. margaret grosch is a graduate of the university of western ontario. she joined cecs in 1992 and spent 7 years as the international liaison co-ordinator. prior to joining cecs, margaret held a marketing position in toronto for several years. she also spent close to 3 years in japan studying the japanese language, and working in teaching and sales/promotion areas. margaret is presently a multidisciplinary co-op co-ordinator with math as her area of specialization. although no longer handling out of canada work terms, margaret has maintained responsiblity for work terms in japan and the co-op japan program. alnoor karsan has a bsc in chemical engineering from the university of salford, u.k. he also took an executive management program at the university of toronto. alnoor has had a diverse career working in engineering and other areas in the u.k., tanzania, usa and canada. he was employed as a manager with the jobs ontario training program. doreen knol, (ba psychology) has a strong belief in the value of co-op education; much of her career has been spent in co-op and career services at mcmaster university. her roles there included placement officer for the mba co-op program and manager of the faculty of engineering's career services for eleven years. a member of the canadian association for co-operative education since 1986, doreen was recognized by the association of career educators and employers with an award of merit for her contributions. doreen co-ordinates primarily for science programs in the 416 area code team. joan lam has a basc in chemical engineering from the university of waterloo and an mba from york university. she is a member of the professional engineers of ontario. she spent six years with careers in engineering and seven years with sales and marketing in the computer industry. some of joan's previous employers are imperial oil and hewlett-packard. wendy moore ruth parker has a bsc from the university of montreal with an honours degree in chemistry, an mba in finance from the university of toronto, and a specialist teaching certificate in chemistry with math as a second teachable. she is qualified to teach french as a second language. ruth helps secure engineering as well as math and french teaching jobs. ruth is a member of the canadian association for co-operative education, the ontario association for mathematics educators as well as co-founder and first chair of university co-op educators of ontario. diane schunk is currently on leave from the university. wendy moore is handling diane's responsibilities in the interim. diane schunk graduated with a bachelor of architecture from the university of notre dame in south bend, indiana. she continued her education at the sorbonne in paris, studying language and civilization. diane has worked in washington, d.c with the aia award winning firm of thomas manion architects, as well as in toronto with strasman architects. she also held a position at l'ecole central de nante teaching technical english and american civilization. about cecs cecs staff applying for admissions upcoming events contact us