8.5 work term evaluation 8.5 work term evaluation employers provide a formal evaluation at the end of the work term. although not required by cecs, your employer may provide a mid-term appraisal. if not, you should ask to have one; mid-term appraisals enable you to improve. weekly encouragement and constructive criticism also benefit your performance. ask your employer if you are meeting expectations. an employer evaluation must be submitted to cecs to cover each co-op work term for which you want to obtain credit. even though your faculty states a minimum number of work terms required for graduation, this does not mean you may forego the evaluation process once you have completed the minimum number of required work terms. 8.5.1 evaluation form and review cecs sends employers co-operative student performance evaluation forms mid-term (see figure 8.1). this form assesses and records your performance on the job and is part of your official co-op record. cecs provides the evaluation form for end-of-term purposes only, not for mid-term appraisals. normally, your immediate supervisor conducts the final review towards the end of your work term. be sure that you review your completed evaluation with your supervisor; doing so gives you the opportunity to discuss the comments. it is your responsibility to ensure the completed form is returned to cecs so that it appears on your co-operative student record. obtain permission from your employer to make a copy of your evaluation, so that you have a copy for your records or for presentation to prospective employers. 8.4.2 who sees your evaluation? your co-ordinator may review your evaluation with you during your return-to-campus interview. with the exception of officials from cecs, the contents of your evaluation are confidential. the overall rating, however, is released to prospective employers during the job application process. [ figure 1 - co-operative student performance evaluation (page 1) ] [ figure 2 - co-operative student performance evaluation (page 2) ] [ figure 3 - co-operative student performance evaluation (page 3) ] [ figure 4 - co-operative student performance evaluation (page 4) ]