appendix a appendix a: regulations and procedures for co-operative programs seeking employment and employer interviews seeking employment: students are expected to seek work term employment through the interview process arranged by co-operative education & career services (cecs). students should not seek employment on their own with a participating uw co-op employer unless specific arrangements are made with the department. students who wish to arrange their own work term assignment must have the position evaluated and approved by cecs to receive credit. job applications: the maximum number of initial job applications allowed may vary from time to time, depending on the number of job opportunities and students seeking employment. the maximum number will be published in important dates and procedures for co-op students and specified during the co-op 101 program. · release of information: a file which includes the co-operative student record, examination reports, employer evaluation of co-operative student forms, records of co-ordinator interviews, etc. is kept on each co-operative student. this confidential file is made available for examination upon the student's proof of identification. no information may be removed from the file. missing interviews: students are expected to attend all individual interviews granted to them. students who anticipate missing an interview for just cause should inform the department immediately so other arrangements can be made. students who miss interviews without just cause may be withdrawn from the job search program and recorded as "on own - university imposed". ranking employers: during the computer match process, students are required to rank all employers by whom they are interviewed. ranking an employer indicates an agreement to work with that employer if matched by the program. refusal to accept the job will normally be recorded on the co-operative student record as "failed work term - refusal to honour previous agreement". deleting job choices: while the computer match system is still in place, the deletion of a job choice will be considered when the student consults with the appropriate field co-ordinator or program co-ordinator. failure to obtain the approval for a ranking deletion may result in the student being placed "on own - university imposed". acceptance of employment: when students receive employment, they are notified to sign an "acceptance of employment" form, signifying their knowledge of having a two work term commitment with an employer. letter of acceptance: each student is expected to write a letter of acceptance to the employer following notification of employment. work terms quantity: upon entry to a co-op program a student is expected to follow the work term/academic term sequence appropriate for that particular program. a student may, for one reason or another, fail to satisfactorily complete the full complement of work terms. for these students, and for students given advanced admission to a co-op program, a certain minimum number of satisfactory work terms must be completed before graduation, namely, a number of work term/months equal to, or greater than, half the number of academic term/months in the program from the time the program begins. in those faculties that offer both regular and co-operative programs, the minimum number of related work terms required for a co-operative degree is normally four. in those faculties offering only the co-operative program, the minimum number of work terms normally equals the number of work terms available and remaining to the student in the program from his/her point of entry. allowance can be made for personal considerations, educational opportunities, and other "on own" conditions with prior approval from the cecs program. however, "on own" conditions do not count toward the minimum requirements for graduation. performance evaluation: evaluation grades are recorded on the "employer evaluation of co-operative student" form or on a special form developed in conjunction with a professional licensing body. the student should ensure that the employer has sent a completed evaluation to the university. failure to report to employer: failure to report to an employer will be recorded on the co-operative student record as "failed work term - refusal to honour previous agreement". withdrawal from the program may also be required. leaving employer without prior approval: terminating employment without prior approval from cecs may result in the co-operative student record having the notation "failed work term - terminating employment without prior approval." withdrawal from the program may also be required. strikes: it is each individual student's responsibility to decide whether or not to cross a picket line in the case of a strike. the role of the field co-ordinator in this situation is to inform the student of the potential results of either decision. see section 7.7 for more information. dismissed with cause: dismissal of a student by an employer will be investigated by the student's field co-ordinator and will normally be recorded on the co-operative student record as "failed work term - dismissed with cause." commitment: a minimum of two consecutive work terms with an employer is expected. provision is allowed however for such situations as one-term jobs and economic uncertainty. in all cases, failure to obtain approval from the appropriate field co-ordinator to not return for a second consecutive work term is normally recorded on the co-operative student record as "failed work term - refused to honour previous agreement." unsatisfactory performance: unsatisfactory performance by a student on a work term is investigated by the student's field co-ordinator. if benefits from further professional training are questionable, the student may be required to withdraw from the program. on own: this condition, as recorded on the co-operative student record, does not count towards the minimum requirements for graduation. this terminology is used to denote the following conditions: on own - self-imposed: the student has been granted a term off by cecs for personal reasons. this condition may be changed on the student record should the student find suitable employment through his/her own efforts. on own - non-credit term: the student was unable to obtain suitable employment through the normal job search process. if suitable employment is subsequently found, student records will be altered accordingly. on own - university imposed: this notation normally indicates that a student has not complied with a program regulation or procedure. reasons for this notation include, but are not restricted to missing interviews without just cause, and failure to discuss deleting job rankings. note: the condition of "on own," while appearing on the co-operative student record, is not visible on the print-out of the record which the student uses as part of the résumé package. changes of term sequence: term sequence changes are considered by the faculty in which the student is enrolled. application, in the form of a letter from the student (supported by an employer and/or a field co-ordinator) must be made to the appropriate assistant registrar. for some faculties, an appropriate application form must be completed. normally the request should be made within the first two weeks of the term preceding the switch point. in addition, the student's academic performance must be "in good standing". it should be noted that the student's academic program may be restricted due to lack of choice of core or elective subjects during particular terms. communication with cecs: each student must maintain communication with the department on all matters pertinent to participation in the co-operative program. students must consult with the appropriate field co-ordinator, program co-ordinator or co-op advisor where regulations and procedures for co-operative program are an issue. the student must ensure that his/her student file is current and correct. standings and appeals: - applicable to sections a and b - cecs which administers these regulations and procedures will first present any notation of "failed work term," "on own - university imposed," or "required to withdraw" (as a result of unsatisfactory work term performance) to the appropriate faculty examinations, promotions or standings committee for a decision. the students is notified by letter of the final decision made by the committee. the decision may be appealed through the normal appeal channels within the faculty. work reports quantity: normally four satisfactory work reports required for graduation with the first one written during the first work term. exceptions to this requirement are stated in the calendar or in the individual student's file. employers, as well, may require additional reports from students as part of the job. normally for a report to be considered, it must have been written during the work term and be related to or evoked by the work term activity. grading: work reports are graded as "outstanding," "very good," "satisfactory," "unsatisfactory"(resubmit) or "unacceptable." provision is made for students to upgrade "unsatisfactory" work reports for re-evaluation by the beginning of the student's next academic term. content and format: the university provides a common set of written guidelines for all co-operative programs. some faculties/departments also provide written addenda and/or specific guidelines. confidentiality: in programs where a faculty member or a co-ordinator normally evaluates the report, provision may be made for the appropriate field co-ordinator or employer to evaluate a confidential report. some faculties/departments may provide more specific requirements in published addenda. students should consult with their field co-ordinator or program co-ordinator before writing a confidential work report. evaluator: each program has a policy stating that work reports are evaluated and graded by either a faculty member, an employer, a field co-ordinator or some combination of these. receipt and return: when the work report is to be evaluated by a faculty member or a field co-ordinator, the report is presented by the student to cecs and a receipt is issued. normally the report may be retrieved from the faculty/department responsible for the evaluation. reports that are not picked up by the first week of the student's next academic term are destroyed. if the student is in a program where the employer evaluates and grades the report, a copy of the report must be turned in to cecs at return to campus time. no copy is required if the report has been declared "confidential" by the employer. all math students submit their work reports directly to the math undergraduate office, 5th floor, math and computer building. all ahs students submit their work reports directly to their home department. all arts (except accounting) students submit their work reports to their home department. engineering students submit their second, third, and fourth work reports directly to their home department. graduation requirements for co-operative programs work terms: quantity: refer to work terms. performance evaluation: in those programs with a stated minimum number of work terms, this number is also the minimum number of satisfactory work terms. in programs with no stated minimum, the required number of satisfactory work terms is one less than the number of work terms remaining in the program from point of entry, provided that the number of work terms available to the student is greater than five; otherwise all work terms must be satisfactory. work reports: quantity and grading: in most programs the submission of a minimum of four work reports graded "satisfactory" or better is a requisite for graduation. provision is usually made for students to upgrade unsatisfactory reports or submit new reports. special arrangements may be considered for cases such as those for which there are less than four work terms available to the student, and other special situations which might arise. registration through final term: all work terms must be completed before the final academic term and the last work report must be submitted no later than the beginning of the final academic term. in all co-operative programs, students must be registered as full-time students in the program in all terms from point of entry through to the final academic term. the only exception occurs in programs on a credit system in which a student may have sufficient credits to be able to register as a part-time student in the final term, provided all full-time requirements of the faculty have been met.