6.3 important questions 6.3 important questions the questions have been divided into two sections. the first section deals with job-related subjects; the second set is concerned with self-awareness. remember that the learning objectives exercise is an ongoing process. the groundwork established in your first and second work terms is realized by re-evaluating the exercise term to term. please note that the following does not constitute a shopping list of questions that must be answered each term. they are primers only. there are no right and wrong answers. sometimes you might not be able to get an answer that satisfies you. 6.3.1 job related the learning objectives you set should clarify your career path and help create a greater understanding of your chosen field. remember: every job is different and some of the questions will not have any relation to your job. § give an outline of the company. what products, activities and/or services does it provide? who are its customers? how many people are employed in various capacities? what are the company's assets, facilities, and equipment? what technologies does it rely on? what is the company's primary marketplace and source of profit? is the main share of the market local or abroad? what was the share price variance during the last year? § give an outline of the departmental structure. how does each department function? how are they organized? what kind of projects are each department responsible for? how do these projects relate to the company? § what did you learn about: production processes, raw materials, and equipment used by the employer? energy requirements? specialized processes? design, research, testing, marketing, and production? buying, budgetary control, and cost analysis? critical path analysis? management by objectives and project management control? quality control and service standards? customer service and human resources? interdependence of departments? personnel, employment problems, and organization of employees? your aspirations and career prospects? § how can you improve: your discipline's skills? communication and productivity? the competitiveness or effectiveness of your employer? standards of quality or service? § analysis/synthesis some people like to take complex situations and analyse them; others like to take a general view of events and fit them together. some are comfortable doing either. where do you fit in? § problem solving how do you tackle problems? are you tenacious, creative, or a combination of the two? what kind of problems do you like to solve? § creativity many people think they want creative jobs. what does "creative" mean to you? does creative relate to objects, designs, ideas, people, relationships, techniques, or systems? how creative does your job need to be? 6.3.2 introspective this section deals with you. the questions help you determine where and how you fit in work force, how you can enhance the learning process in the future, and how to plan a career. § working with people on your work term every job requires you to work with people. do you prefer to work alone or in a group? with the public? on a one to one basis or in a group? § competition are you competitive? do you need competition or are you happier in a less stressful environment? § tension and stress common examples of stressful situations include exams, delivering speeches, and meeting deadlines. how do you handle stress? do you fall apart or thrive? do you procrastinate or plan ahead? § criticism no one likes to be criticized. what is your typical reaction to criticism? are you defensive or aggressive? how does your reaction change when the criticism is from superiors, peers, or subordinates? § feedback how much feedback do you need? how much praise do you need? how frequently and quickly do you need praise? § doing vs. thinking some people have great ideas, but tend to be intimidated by implementation. others are very good at implementing ideas, but cannot generate them. where do you fit in? § challenges when challenged, what is your reaction? how much challenge do you need? how much variety? at what point does a challenge become a hassle? § prestige how important is status to you? do you have to have ownership of an idea or project, or are you happy contributing? § salesmanship some people enjoy persuading others. others consider persuasion to be aggressive and intrusive. where do you fit in? § judgement how do you make decisions? do you have to have every fact, or do you trust intuition? do you decide quickly or at length? do you take full responsibility for your decisions or do you prefer sharing decisions? § what did you learn from project work? specialized work? daily work? repetitive work? § how did your work relate to your previous work experiences? academic knowledge?