cecs [ students | graduating student employment services ] your browser does not support script graduating in 2001 or 2002? looking for full-time employment? employment network is a weekly job listing available year-round to all 2001/02 university of waterloo graduating students. permanent and contract jobs received by cecs are available on-line to graduating students on campus or on a fall co-op work term. how to view employment network: you must register. use the on-line access system to view job opportunities. review the employment network and choose positions in which you are interested. prepare a customized application package for each position. application package to apply for jobs, prepare an application package consisting of: a copy of a cacee (standard job application ) form, completed, except for page 4 which you should customize for each employer you apply to a cover letter your résumé an academic grade report (if requested, use your last grade report that was mailed to your permanent address) each job description will indicate what and how to submit. please adhere to application deadlines and any special instructions. be sure to include your id number on all correspondence for data entry. application packages missing your uw student id number will not be scheduled for interviews. tips (important) if you are a co-op student on your fall work term, be sure to tell the employer in your cover letter that you are on a work term and a telephone number where you can be reached. if you have completed your studies and have left uw, be sure to tell the employer in your cover letter that you are not on campus. in your cover letter print the job number below the name of the organization provide your current telephone number in the last paragraph of your cover letter ask the employer to contact you directly to arrange a date, time and place for an interview application procedures adhere to the application instructions, found at the end of each job description. submit application package to: human resources company name address fax # (xxx)xxx-xxxx e-mail: submit application package to: career services, bin # xxxx no later than month/day by 4:30 pm please visit our web site to apply on-line. application bins located on the main floor of needles hall. if you are a co-op student on your fall work term and application instructions say to use a numbered bin, fax your application package to us by the deadline at (519) 746-6019. interviews check student access for group and/or individual interviews, take note of date, time and room number wait in the first floor seating area in nh until your name is called for your interview check in at the paging desk when your name is called before proceeding to the interview room for a group interview proceed directly to room at the appropriate time, you will not be paged graduating students- important dates/deadlines 2001/2002 secured employment - withdraw from the graduating student employment service. employer information sessions - subscribe now and get all the latest on the employer info sessions to join the mailing list send an e-mail to: majordomo@admmail.uwaterloo.ca and type as your message: subscribe cecsinfo informal, informative, and interactive...meet with perspective organizations to learn about career opportunities. career/ job fairs co-sponsored by conestoga college, university of guelph, university of waterloo, and wilfrid laurier university. http://www.partners4employment.ca career services help with your résumé/cover letter help with interview skills attend upcoming workshops. please call cecs at (519) 888-4047or e-mail: cecscs@uwaterloo.ca