9.8 development 9.8 development 9.8.1 starting before you leave campus, examine some of the excellent or outstanding work reports in the career resource centre, first floor needles hall. early in the work term, meet with your supervisor to discuss the type of work you are doing and decide on a suitable topic for your report. support the report with research. ensure that your supervisor is familiar with the report requirements and with these guidelines. prepare a research schedule and keep an organized record of observations, apparatus, and meetings. remember that seemingly unimportant items may be useful in your report. your report's preparation is an ongoing part of your work term, not a chore for the end of term. 9.8.2 planning prepare an outline of topics and subtopics. consider what information should be included in each topic, and where you need figures. you might want to use a separate sheet of paper or file card for each topic. arrange the topics in a logical order, number them, and add short notes to each as you think of more ideas. you should spend quite a bit of time in this planning stage. starting with a well-organized plan helps you to write a clear presentation for your reader. finally, consider the purpose of your report; keeping your purpose in mind as you write focuses your writing. sometimes the organization of a report is obvious: a report about computer prices would probably be arranged from the cheapest computer to the most expensive, whereas a report describing a building's construction would probably be arranged in chronological order. in the comprehensive canadian text, technical writing, markel and holmes suggest several methods for arranging and developing a report. ideas, methods, objects, or alternatives can be discussed in a report using any of the following strategies: in problem/method/solution response in cause and effect sequence in chronological (time) sequence in a spatial (or location) sequence in order from general to specific in order from most important to least important. by classification (group ideas/objects into similar classes) by partition (separate ideas/objects into component parts) by comparing (show similarities between ideas/objects) decide which order, pattern, or sequence is most useful for your topic and audience. proper planning yields an outline of headings and lists of connected ideas (andrews and ratz 58). 9.8.3 writing read over your outline before you begin to write. you may wish to start writing with the introduction or you may feel more comfortable starting in the main body of the report. the important thing is to start writing. do not be too concerned with spelling, punctuation, or grammar in the first draft. try to choose words that convey your meaning to the reader. leave lots of space for revision and editing. after you have written a few sections, leave your report for a while. when you return to your report, read the sections you wrote to ensure that you have considered your audience and followed your outline. 9.8.4 revising remember that you are aiming for clear, concise writing. use a thesaurus and a good dictionary. check spelling, grammar, and sentence structure as you read through your work. check the meaning of words that are even slightly unfamiliar to you. avoid using run-on sentences and ensure that each paragraph covers one topic only. paragraphs and sections should have a section introducing readers to your topic, a main section that explains details, and a final section that provides a succinct summary. go through the report several times to check the logic, clarity, punctuation, and layout. finally, ask yourself if the report is doing what you want it to do, and if it makes sense. if this is your first work report or if you doubt your ability to revise your work well, consult some of the reference books on writing listed in recommended reading. they offer good ideas and shortcuts, sympathy, and even humour to help you with your report. (remember to give them credit in your bibliography.) ask your supervisor to read your first draft and offer suggestions. also ask someone who is unfamiliar with the technical aspects of your work to read the draft and appraise its comprehensibility and suitability. reading your draft aloud helps to eliminate grammatical and stylistic errors. reference books also contain lists of words and expressions to avoid in your writing while offering suggestions for better choices. a few points on style are illustrated below: § avoid ambiguity. avoid: a large amount of money was spent on promotion. use: the company spent approximately $50,000 on promotion. § avoid long-winded phrases. avoid: it will be seen upon examination of figure 2 that the response declined with time. use: the response declined with time (fig. 2). § use active voice. avoid: the benefit of the new computer system is being considered by the company president. use: the company president is considering the benefit of the new computer system. § avoid slang avoid: repairing the equipment was tough going and the extra work cost the company a bundle. use: repairing the equipment was complicated, time-consuming, and expensive. 9.8.5 completing type or print your report and make sure it has a professional appearance. a neat, well organized, and accurate report gives the reader confidence in you. a poorly presented report does not ensure a sympathetic response from the reader. follow these requirements in the layout of your report: leave a margin of at least 3.8 cm. (1.5 in.) on both the left and right sides of the page to allow for binding and for the evaluator's comments. use one-and-one-half or double spacing throughout. all paragraphs should be separated by the clear space provided by an extra carriage return. although it is a matter of choice, you might try using block format throughout, including the letter of submittal. this means that all text in the main sections should start at the left margin, all text in the subsections should start at a second margin set in from the main margin, and so on. begin each main section listed in the table of contents on a separate page. be consistent in the style of your headings or subheadings (capitalization, underlining, alignment). be consistent in the number of spaces between headings and text. number the preliminary pages with roman numerals, beginning with "ii" as the table of contents. roman numerals are centered at the bottom of each page. use arabic numerals in the top right corner of the remaining pages of the report up to and including the appendix. note that the letter of submittal should not be numbered, and the summary, or abstract should be numbered page one of the document.