9.10 requirements and procedures 9.10 requirements and procedures 9.10.1 number normally, a minimum of four satisfactory work reports is required for graduation and normally not more than one report is permitted each work term. if your faculty has other requirements, they are listed in the undergraduate calendar. 9.10.2 grading acceptable work reports are graded outstanding, excellent, very good, good (math work reports only) or satisfactory. your report is marked using a standard evaluation form (click to view). if your report is graded unsatisfactory (resubmit), you may choose to resubmit the report. if you resubmit a report, it must be handed in by the last day of classes of the current term. note that the deadline may differ by faculty. unacceptable work reports do not receive credit. grades awarded for work reports are shown on your co-operative student record as well as your examination report and transcripts. 9.10.3 plagiarism copying words and ideas from others without giving proper credit is unacceptable: plagiarism is a serious form of infringement. the basic premise in research and report writing is that an author cannot copyright facts, news, or ideas; the copyright covers only the way in which they are expressed. therefore if you take facts, news, or ideas from other sources and express them in your own words, you have not plagiarized or infringed anyone's copyright. but if you quote from someone's work without a reference to the source, then you are implying that the quotations are yours, and this is plagiarism. plagiarism also occurs if you refer incompletely to a work; for example, when the source of the first quote is fully identified, but subsequent quotes from the same source are not identified. plagiarism is punished severely in the university environment, usually by expulsion, if there is a fraudulent intent. in a recent peo (professional engineers ontario) decision, an application for membership was denied because a thesis submitted to the peo academic requirements committee was proven to be plagiarized. follow the guidelines for fair dealing, and avoid the heartache of plagiarism (andrews and ratz 212). 9.10.4 due date normally, work reports are due seven days after the first official day of lectures of the academic term in which the report is required. actual dates may vary across faculties so it is best to check with your undergraduate office. if you are handing in your report to co-op education, see the important co-op dates and procedures handout for the date required. if you are to submit the original copy for evaluation to cecs (see section 9.1) hand it in at co-op reception and obtain a receipt. you must also give one copy to your employer and you should keep one copy for yourself. 9.10.5 return of graded reports reports graded by co-op field co-ordinators are available after initial interview phase match results are available (see important co-op dates and procedures). dates for the return of reports marked by faculty vary by program. check with your undergraduate secretary. reports may be destroyed if they are not picked up by the end of term.