cecs [ about cecs | affiliations ] your browser does not support script the university of waterloo is proud to be affiliated with the following organizations: canadian association for co-operative education (cafce) | visit the canadian association for co-operative education, through partnership with universities, colleges, and the business sector, actively promotes understanding, and the benefits of co-op education. cafce is proactive in advancing the position of educational institutions, governments, and employers involved in co-op education. it is a prominent advocate in promoting co-op education initiatives. cooperative education & internship association (ceia) | visit the co-operative education & internship association, based in the u.s.a., serves professionals who promote the educational strategy of co-operative education on a world-wide basis. as an organization, ceia seeks to advocate work study integration, to be an important resource of technical information and assistance to schools, employing organizations, and government agencies who endeavour to establish, strengthen, or maintain their programmes. as well, ceia offers a forum for support, learning opportunities and exposure to multiple models, concerns, and techniques for integrating work and study between members and experts throughout the field. world association for co-operative education (wace) | visit the world association for co-operative education is designed to foster co-operative education throughout the world. it advocates co-op and provides information and assistance to schools, employers, and governments. its main objectives include promoting and advancing work-integrated learning at an international level; building a global alliance of education, industry, and government; advocating and advancing international work-integrated learning as a human resource development strategy; providing value-added services, information and products; and sponsoring a biennial world conference and regional forums for association members. wace offers an opportunity to strengthen ties between education and the workplace, and to enhance individual development and national productivity. education at work ontario (ewo) | visit education at work ontario, representing the merger between college co-operative educators of ontario and university co-operative educators of ontario) is organized to function as a cohesive body of post-secondary co-operative education educators in ontario. it aims to provide a forum for the exchange of ideas and information through workshops and seminars and to gather and share information, such as statistics, survey results, etc., about ontario co-op education programmes. as well, goals include identifying provincial issues and needs; developing plans and strategies as necessary; promoting co-operative education to students, educators, employers, and the government; and maintaining a liaison with cafce and an involvement in other co-operative education associations. canadian association of career educators and employers (cacee) | visit the canadian association of career educators and employers is a national, bilingual, non-profit association which is dedicated to facilitating the process of matching graduates with employment. through a partnership of employer recruiters and career educators, they seek to provide information, advice, and services to students, employers, and career centre personnel in the areas of career planning and student recruitment. cacee represents a partnership of business and education working towards a common goal. american society for engineering education (asee/ced) | visit the american society for engineering education is committed to furthering education in engineering and engineering technology. the society aims to promote excellence in instruction, research, public service, and practice; to exercise worldwide leadership; to foster the technological education of society; and to provide quality products and services to its members. as well, the society seeks to encourage local, national, and international communication and collaboration, to influence corporate and government policies, and to promote professional interaction and life-long learning. the co-operative education division of the american society for engineering education is dedicated to the improvement and furtherance of co-operative education in engineering and engineering technology. this division works to develop high principles and maintain integrity of co-operative education in both the educational and industrial worlds. ced provides leadership to engineering and engineering technology programs and offers opportunities for its committees to provide guidance in the areas of employer relations, communications, public relations, professional services, and research. about cecs cecs staff applying for admissions upcoming events contact us