8.3 communication 8.3 worksite visit co-op field co-ordinators are the university's primary contact for employers and students during the work term. they are located in cities throughout ontario and elsewhere. during the work term your field co-ordinator will meet with you to discuss, among other things, your experience on the job and future work term plans. the meeting usually takes place at the worksite, though phone and e-mail are sometimes used, and occurs during the middle two months of the term. the field co-ordinator will also consult with your employer. students are assigned to field co-ordinators according to the location and faculty interest of their employer. therefore, you will likely meet several field co-ordinators during the years you take part in the co-op system. should you require assistance during the work term, please contact your field co-ordinator. not sure who you field co-ordinator is? contact co-op reception at cecs@uwaterloo.ca or call (519) 888-4026. note that sometimes your worksite visit may not occur until late in the term. please don't wait for the field co-ordinator to visit if you need to discuss an urgent matter. field co-ordinators expect you to contact them if you need help. worksite visit agenda - student topics covered in this meeting depend partly on individual circumstances, needs, and interests. you will receive most value from the meeting by preparing for it in advance and having your questions about co-op and career ready. following is a typical agenda: your learning objectives and goals for the work term job responsibilities and opportunities so far approach to remainder of work term potential to return to this employer for another work term potential for other students to work at this organization networking opportunities within the organization, with suppliers, with customers what is your hourly wage? performance evaluation plans for future work terms work report academic standing return-to-campus meeting additional topics might include: housing issues related to profession, e.g., engineering, accounting entrepreneurial work terms international employment career counselling worksite visit agenda - employer topics covered in this meeting depend partly on the employer's circumstances, but most often include the following: expectations of the co-op program comments about the work term work reports performance evaluations potential for hiring students again update on co-op and university affairs