9.9 format 9.9 format consistency is more important than adhering to convention. communication is the most important factor. this section illustrates a commonly used format. the report must be bound with firm covers and held together at the spine with a two or three-holed binding mechanism or spiral plastic binding. individual rings or spring clips are unacceptable. 9.9.1 preliminary pages the first part of the report must be organized in the following sequence: front cover title page letter of submittal including statement of confidentiality (where required) table of contents lists of tables and figures preliminary pages should be create a good first impression for the reader. § front cover the front cover must contain: the title of the report your name your previous academic term and department/program. keep the report title shorter than 50 characters, including spaces. use photographs or graphic design to improve the appearance of your cover. if you use a transparent cover you do not need to list any of the above information, since your title page is visible. § title page the title page presents an expanded version of the information contained on the front cover. beginning at the top of the page, list the following: university of waterloo your faculty title of report name and location of your employer your name, previous academic term, department, and program [ figure 1 - sample title page ] § letter of submittal the letter of submittal must follow the format of a standard business letter. if this is your first report (except if you are in arts, math, ahs, geography or science) address your letter to mr. b. lumsden, director, co-operative education & career services. if it is not your first report or if you are in arts, math, geography or science, direct your letter to the department chair. if you are in ahs, your letter should be addressed to the associate dean of your faculty. check that all names are spelled correctly. use your employer's letterhead or use your home address on plain paper. your letter must contain: report title and number (your first, second, and so on) employer previous academic term supervisor(s) department(s) main activity of employer and department purpose of report acknowledgments and explanation of assistance statement of endorsement (shown below) statement of confidentiality, if required your name, id number, and signature the statement of endorsement shall read: "this report was written entirely by me and has not received any previous academic credit at this or any other institution." 491 birchmount cres. winnipeg, manitoba r4v 1s5 sept. 7, 2001 mr. b. lumsden, director cooperative education & career services university of waterloo waterloo, ontario n2l 3g1 dear sir: this report, entitled “the biological and health effects of chlorine in our water supply,” was prepared as my 1b work report for dynamic engineering consultants.  this is my first work term report. the purpose of this report is to evaluate the benefits and negative consequences of chlorine content in public water supplies. dynamic engineering consultants provide customers with top-of-the-line engineering consulting on a large number of topics, ranging from environmental impact to municipal design in southwestern ontario. the environmental consulting section, in which i was employed, is managed by jennifer wong and is primarily involved with providing clients with consultation on large projects which may have adverse environmental effects. this report was written entirely by me and has not received any previous academic credit at this or any other institution.  i would like to thank ms. jennifer wong for providing me with valuable advice and resources, including documentation and leads to informative web sites. i also wish thank mr. ken smith for proofreading my report and improving its appearance. i received no other assistance. sincerely, (signature) allan a. student id 01158163 [ figure 2 - sample letter of submittal ] § table of contents the table of contents lists all main sections in your report and any subsections with headings. ensure that each entry in the table of contents refers to the correct page number. connect each entry to its page number with a dotted line. align the page numbers on the right side of your page. do not include preliminary pages in your table of contents. [ figure 3 - sample table of contents ] § lists of tables and figures these two lists are listed separately and immediately after the table of contents. each list identifies its components by number, title, and page number. do not list any tables or figures that are in the appendices. [ figure 4 - sample list of figures ] [ figure 5 - sample list of tables ] 9.9.2 summary or abstract normally a technical report contains a summary, while a scientific report contains an abstract. the faculties of engineering, environmental studies, mathematics and science require a technical report with a summary. other faculties may allow an abstract in their reports. § summary the summary should be written after you complete the rest of the report. it should be able to stand alone. frequently, it is the only part read by management. it should answer, "what does this report contain?" keep your summary concise (preferably one page). you may use lists, but easy-to-read sentences are best. the summary should present the: purpose of the report scope of the report major points highlights of the conclusions and recommendations the summary page should be the first page of the main document. following such an organizational pattern does not mean, however, that the conclusions and recommendations are simply restated. the summary, instead, highlights significant or key items. it should not refer explicitly to particular components of the report. for example, the following statement is unacceptable in a summary: "five alternative shaft sizes were considered and the stress magnitudes calculated for each shaft are shown in table 6. the final shaft design is shown in figure 3." summary this report concentrates on the design of a digital circuit that is a portion of an interface between a command generator and a satellite simulator.  the circuit demodulates an incoming recovered subcarrier signal and converts commands to a parallel format that is introduced to a data converter.  the purpose of this investigation is to provide an analysis for this circuit, with considerations given to the entire interface setup. demodulation is achieved through the use of a missing pulse detector that checks for phase changes.  a clock is generated by detecting the edges on the carrier.  the tone decoder uses the data and clock to recognize command bits, and converts the data into a parallel signal with shift registers. it is concluded that the digital solution implemented is completely effective for this application, except during the presence of an unclean incoming signal or the absence of all wave input.  a method of eliminating this inconsistency involving the use of an lm567 chip is discussed, and it is also concluded that this method is entirely practical. the removal of unexpected signal distortions and the use of the proposed circuit addition is recommended [ figure 6 - sample summary ] § abstract the abstract is a short, self-contained paragraph, usually no more than 200 words long, at the beginning of your report. it is a synopsis of information contained in the report. an abstract states the problem and gives a summary of your main discoveries and conclusions. your statements should be clear and concise so that a reader can identify the contents of the report and decide whether or not to read the rest of it. abstract the hypothesis that hostile and nonhostile individuals would differ in both magnitude and duration of cardiovascular reactivity to relieved anger was tested.  participants were 66 older adults (mean age, 62; 38 women and 28 men; 70% caucasian american, 30% african american).  each took part in a structured interview scored using the interpersonal hostility assessment technique. later each relived a self-chosen anger memory while heart rate and systolic and diastolic blood pressures were measured continuously using an ohmeda finapres monitor.  hostile participants had larger and longer-lasting blood pressure responses to anger. african americans also showed longer-lasting blood pressure reactivity to anger.  health and measurement implications are discussed. key words: anger; cardiovascular reactivity; cardiovascular recovery; hostility; ohmeda finapres monitor; older adults. taken from: fredrickson b.l., maynard, k.e., helms, m.j., haney, t.l., siegler, i.c. & barefoot, j.c. (2000)  hostility predicts magnitude and duration of blood pressure response to anger.  journal of behavioral medicine, 23 (3), 229 – 243. [ figure 7 - sample abstract ] § what are the differences between the abstract and the summary? the summary condenses the entire report into a few short paragraphs, at the front of the report, usually after the title page. the summary does not describe the report: it is the report in miniature. saying that recommendations and conclusions are made is not specific enough; you need to say what the recommendations and conclusions are. it answers the questions "what is the problem?", "how can it be solved?", and "what should i do about it?" an abstract is more common in research papers than in reports. it ranges in length from 50 to 200 words long and is a highly condensed summary. the abstract states a problem, the method of approach, and the results. the abstract is separate from the report and is often inserted in an information retrieval system. for example, an abstract is included in such things as magazine listings of report topics, or a computer database listing of report topics, whereas a summary is included in the report. 9.9.3 report § introduction the introduction is always the first section in the body of your report. it presents your work and defines the problem or project. it should supply enough background information to help the reader understand why your report was written and how it relates to similar work. your objectives should be written clearly and concisely. however, the introduction should deliver a sufficient impact to encourage continued reading. 1.0 introduction texts regarding politics and administration guide one’s attention to the actions of leaders who specialize in decision-making:  presidents, senators, generals, and managers.  the study of preparation, on the other hand, concerns the general public who is actively seeking to be more than pawns for others to direct and manipulate; striving instead to shape policies and organizations according to our own desires (nagel, 1987). toffer (1970), predicted an increasing emphasis on temporary groups brought together for a specific task and a decreasing emphasis on permanent states in bureaucratic administration.  this prediction has proven true, and we now envision a world with greater opportunities for people to play a role in decisions affecting their lives, a greater diffusion of relevant and useful information and a profound need for all citizens within a democracy to be effective decision makers. although the most common form of participation known to man is voting and campaigning, it does, in fact, include much more.  in recent decades, the democratic ideal has intensified, inspiring a search for richer, and less perfunctory forms of self-government.  the focus of this report is how effective a citizen participation program can be applied to the case of corporation of the town of milton. the study includes an evaluation of what participation is and why it should be promoted, the principles involved in creating a trusting relationship with the public, and an application of these principles in the aforementioned case. [ figure 8 - sample introduction ] § body you state the problem (or project) in your introduction. the main section analyzes the problem, then summarizes and explains your findings. organize the report into sections; use a clear and consistent system of headings. you may be able to follow the commonly used system of "materials and methods," "results," "discussion and interpretations," with appropriate subheadings. if your topic dictates its own system of headings and subheadings, ensure that the reader is able to follow them easily. consider using the numbering system employed in this document. do not use more than three levels of numbers: use bullets or dashes instead of a fourth level. where you indent for a subheading, the entire subsection below must follow that new margin. remember that capitalization and bolding makes your headings stand out more. when citing sources, follow the standard accepted by your faculty. if your faculty has not recommended or prepared a style manual, adopt a style used by some of the reference books or journals in your discipline. a good source is the modern languages association's style guide. the entire report, including the introduction, should rarely be more than 4,000 words. if you find it necessary to exceed this length, discuss your report with your field co-ordinator or a faculty member before you complete it. § tables and figures tables and figures help clarify your work for the reader. any table or figure, however, must serve a specific purpose. consider whether the information is better presented graphically or in a table. tables and figures should be cited in the text, and should be placed as soon as is practical after the reference. you should present large volumes of tables and figures in an appendix. captions may be typed above or below the figure or centered on a facing page. captions for both tables and figures must be concise, but must also be inclusive and comprehensive. the caption and its table are inseparable; either is usually meaningless alone. remember you must refer in the main body of your report to the data shown in tables and figures. tables: use a table only when you need to present complex or voluminous data that contains several variables. if the data set is small or the variables few in number, consider putting the information into the text rather than into a table. if you do use tables, check in journals or reference books in your discipline for layout and design examples. generally, the static elements are listed vertically and variables are listed horizontally. do not separate the vertical columns with lines. use the standard rules for si units. these are often summarized in reference books on writing reports and can be found in the metric practice guide. usually, each table is placed on a separate page with the table number and caption typed above it. in the case of short tables, two may fit on one page. table 13.  the crop nectar amounts found among females nectar feeding, resting and blood seeking. proportion (%) with indicated nectar ranka year activity n 0 1 2 3 1978 nectar feeding 55 69.1 21.8 9.1 0.0 resting 14 35.7 21.4 14.3 28.6 blood seeking 506 48.6 22.6 14.8 14.0 1979 nectar feeding 150 61.3 33.3 4.7 0.7 resting 530 30.4 30.4 27.1 12.1 blood seeking 609 27.8 48.4 18.4 5.4 the crop nectar amounts were classified being great (3) (>2.0 , moderate (2) (0.52.0 , little (1) (<0.5 or as having no apparent nectar. table 1.  per capita residential consumption of airdrie and calgary 1994-1999 (cubic meters/month). year calgary airdrie percent increase 1994 11.56 7.09 63.09% 1995 10.46 6.52 60.37% 1996 11.20 n/a n/a 1997 10.97 n/a n/a 1998 11.20 6.91 62.13% 1999 10.59 6.41 65.16% average 62.7% [ figure 9 - sample tables ] figures: figures include line drawings (diagrams, histograms, graphs) and photographs. figures are an excellent way to relate various aspects of your data that are often difficult to present in words. to give your report a professional quality, use a word processor and good quality printer; use photographs only if they are exceptionally clear and serve a better purpose than a hand-drawn diagram. again, check the professional journals for your discipline in the university library or a local library for examples of effective use of figures. each figure should be on a separate page. [ figure 10 - sample figure ] 9.9.4 conclusions and recommendations conclusions and recommendations are very important to your report and there is frequent confusion over the content of these separate items. a simple rule is to place any statements that you can derive from the main body's investigation in the conclusion of your report. include in the recommendations any comments that you feel might assist in future activities. these future activities are probably not your responsibility and you should attempt to give the reader the benefit of your experience from working on the problem. just like the summary, conclusions should be brief (preferably one page), but complete and understandable. you may use lists, but easy-to-read sentences are best. each paragraph should deal with only one aspect of the study. conclusions may only be drawn if they are supported fully by the analyses described in the body of your report. three or more conclusions are expected. 4.0 conclusions hybrid-electric vehicles outperform electric vehicles. electric cars are well suited to city traffic but lack the performance needed for highway use.  the hybrid vehicle’s additional combustion engine helps to outperform the electric vehicle on the highway. the cars must be priced lower to become more popular. government subsidies in some states and provinces significantly reduce the prices of low-emissions vehicles.  hybrids will be popular because many consumers cannot afford separate highway and city vehicles. the cars tread on the environment. all the cars generally use less energy but at reduced performance.  this will always be a tradeoff area.  hybrids have low emissions, electrics have zero emissions, and both are a sound solution to urban smog. gasoline improvements, fuel cells and alternative fuels are future prospects. gasoline engines and exhaust systems have experienced major technical advances that make hybrid vehicles more promising.  fuel cells will provide clean power to the cars of the future.  alternative fuels will remain a major area of research because of widespread dependency upon fossil fuels. [ figure 11 - sample conclusions ] recommendations should be organized in the same manner as conclusions and should follow them on a separate page. recommendations are essentially speculative, but they should follow logically from your conclusions. two or more recommendations are expected. recommendations an extensive analysis should be conducted into the painting processes of all other parts on the ms2000. the paint racks should be examined for their allowance of flexibility and constraint on the parts they hold. a study should also be done on the effects of the immense heat on the plastic parts, and of the defects that can be attributed to it.1. continued sampling limited capability studies (50 samples) should be conducted on an average of two times per month on the switch bezels and other parts to ensure that they continue to be produced defect-free.2. better supervision a full-time operator should be hired in order to ensure that spc data is being correctly entered consistently. this person should also bring to the attention of the engineers any fluctuation on the data that may indicate a problem in the production process.3. engineering advice during a 100% sort, an engineer should always be present in order to answer any questions the operators may have about the parts, or to offer advice if early warning signs of new defects should arise. [ figure 12 - sample recommendations ] it might help to think of your report in this way: management likely reads only the summary, conclusions, and recommendations; technical staff and your boss may read to the end of the main text; successors read the whole report. 9.9.5 references this section can also be named works cited or bibliography according to the preference of your faculty. list all sources referred to in the report. do not try to impress the reader by listing publications that you have not used. if you use personal conversations as a source, list the participants' positions and the conversation's theme, time, and place. citing electronic sources can be a challenge. if one or more of your references are taken from the internet, you may find the following url beneficial: http://library.uwaterloo.ca/howto/howto51.old you may also wish to look at this site: http://www.cc.emory.edu/whscl/citation.formats.html 9.9.6 glossary add a glossary only if the text is heavy with specialized terms, mathematical symbols, or technical jargon. if you have only the occasional term in your report, define it as part of the text: "...that pressure (p) is a function of temperature (t)..." "...the snout area contains a pair of nasolabial grooves (nlg; fig. 4c)..." 9.9.7 appendix not all reports have or need an appendix. appendices can be considered stand-alone documents, and thus could have their own table of contents. the appendix should contain any information that substantiates the report, but that is not required for a comprehensive understanding of your work. the appendix may contain bulky data such as lengthy tables, computer printouts, descriptions of processes or operations, analytical procedures, or maps. assign consecutive letters or numbers along with names to each, for example: "appendix a -- detailed street calculations," "appendix b -- bearing plate calculations," or "appendix 1 --site maps."