cecs [ about cecs ] your browser does not support script co-operative education & career services (cecs) administers the co-operative education system and career-related services for the university of waterloo. cecs staff function as a liaison between students, employers, alumni, and the different faculties and departments of the university to help to determine and facilitate employment opportunities. the department also advises students and alumni students on their educational, vocational, and personal development and conducts career development seminars and workshops. our location and facilities cecs is located on the first floor of ira g. needles hall on the campus of the university of waterloo. in addition to housing administrative offices our facilities include four rooms suitable for group presentations with capacities from 12 to 50 people, 50 individual interview rooms,three multiple telephone interview rooms, and the career resource centre which houses career reference and counselling material and activities. each year cecs co-ordinates approximately 45,000 individual interviews conducted by more than 6,000 recruiters. the majority of these interviews take place on campus using our facilities. needles hall, home of cecs affiliates of co-operative education & career services cecs holds membership in or is affiliated with these organizations. what is co-operative education? according to the canadian association of co-operative education, co-operative education is defined as a program that formally integrates a student's academic studies with work experience in co-operative employer organizations. the usual plan is for the student to alternate periods of experience in appropriate fields of business, industry, government, social services, and the professions according to the following criteria: each work situation is developed and/or approved by the co-operative educational institution as a suitable learning situation the co-operative education student is engaged in productive work rather than merely observing the co-operative education student receives remuneration for the work performed the co-operative education student's progress on the job is monitored by the co-operative education institution the co-operative education student's performance on the job is supervised and evaluated by the student's employer the total co-operative work experience is normally fifty percent of the time spent in academic study, and in no circumstances less than thirty percent the standard model at the university of waterloo is one that alternates classroom and work site experiences every four months. because of its size (10,000 students in more than 90 co-op plans in partnership with 2,800 employers), the opportunities for learning, growth, and career development are boundless. how to reach us if you cannot find what you are looking for in this website, please contact us. e-mail: cecs@admmail.uwaterloo.ca phone: (519) 888-4026 fax: (519) 746-4103 about cecs cecs staff applying for admissions upcoming events contact us