health services - university of waterloo tuberculosis tuberculosis (tb) is a chronic, often a lifelong process, as well as infectious, and contagious disease, caused by a specific bacteria: koch's bacillus. there are two species of bacillus capable of producing infection in humans: mycobacterium tuberculosis (m.t) and mycobacterium bovis (m. bovis). m. bovis infection was recognized as a major public health problem when this organism was transmitted to humans via the milk from infected cows. the introduction of the pasteurization of milk helped to control this problem. however, m. t. infection is still, world wide, a serious public health problem, especially in developing countries. statistical survey. the world health organization (who) estimates that 20 million new tb cases are reported annually. tb is also responsible for 3 million deaths every year, more than any other infectious disease. also, who estimates that one-third of the world's population is infected with this disease. in canada, the number of tb cases declined sharply after the introduction of specific drugs for tb treatment in the 1950's. to date, the number of new cases is approximately 2,000 per year. in 1995, a total of 22,813 new cases of tb were reported in the united states. in waterloo region, between 1990 and 1994, the tb rate has remained less than 6 people per 100,000 habitants per year. tb affects both sexes, males accounting for 58% of the total cases. young adults were affected the most, especially between 15 to 35 years old, and older than age 65. four cases of tb were diagnosed in children under the age of 5. who is at high-risk? at present, tb remains concentrated in certain high-risk groups: 1- people born in areas where the disease is present all the time, such as asia, africa, middle east, eastern and southern europe, latin america and the caribbean. 2- aboriginal communities. 3- hiv-infected people. 4- homeless or urban poor individuals. 5- those with inactive tb that has not been adequately treated. 6- intravenous drug users. 7- malnutrition and/or alcoholism. 8- people with diabetes, and 9- people with certain types of cancer. how do you acquire tb? it is important differentiate between tb infection and tb disease. when someone gets the bacillus in the body, and has not yet developed symptoms of disease, however, a special skin test -mantoux- is positive, this person has tb infection, also named "inactive tb", or tb exposure. when a person gets the bacillus in the body, has symptoms from tb, and the laboratory tests confirm the presence of bacillus which causes tb, this person has tb disease or "active tb". only the person with active tb can spread tb bacillus to others. to acquire tb you have to be in contact with someone who has active tb. when a person with active tb coughs, sneezes, signs, or speaks, they release the tb bacteria, millions of them into the surrounding air. if you continuously breathe this contaminated air with the tb bacillus, you can acquire tb, however, it is rarely acquired by sharing drinks or food with an active tb patient. the common contagious form is via air. what happens after contagion? the bacillus reaches the lungs, that is the common first place attacked, developing pulmonary tb. from here, the bacillus can go and attack another parts of the body such as bones and joints, especially the spine; the liver, brain, reproductive, urinary and digestive systems, etc.. in some cases, the body can fight off the infection and surrounds the bacillus in little capsules called tubercles, in which the tb bacillus are harmless -like "sleeping" germs-. an important thing to keep in mind is that sometimes you can develop tb disease several years, usually within 2-3 years, after being exposed for the first time. this commonly happens as a result of not eating well, poor living conditions, excess stress, acquiring aids or other medical problems, or growing older. what are the pulmonary tb symptoms? early diagnosis is very important in the control and cure of tb. the symptoms are: a lot of coughing , and chest pain while coughing. the cough is "dry" at beginning of the disease, maybe for several months, then coughing up mucus, blood, or a mixture of both. sometimes, coughing up blood is the first manifestation of tb disease. fever: in some cases a chronic low-grade fever is the only symptom of tb and, in this particularly case, the diagnosis is does not easy. others symptoms of pulmonary tb are night sweats, loss of appetite, loss of weight, easy fatigue or feeling very tired. what test do you do for tb? a special skin test: mantoux. it consists of an almost painless injection of a small amount of a special liquid in the skin of your forearm. later, 48 to 72 hours, the doctor or nurse will check and measure the spot to see if there is any swelling. only those reactions over a certain size are considered positive. the mantoux test becomes positive 3 to 12 weeks after tb contagion. up-dated studies show that monotest, another tb skin test for screening tb infection, was recently introduced with successful results, and maybe a useful alternative. what does a positive skin test mean? it means that you have been exposed to tb bacteria, and you have them in your body. it does not mean that you have active disease. however, your doctor will send you for a chest x-ray to see if the tb germs have damaged your lungs. to diagnose active tb disease, tb bacillus have to be present in the spit (sputum) or other clinical specimens. what about tb treatment? do you remember the differences between tb inactive and tb active described above?, well, the tb treatment depends on these facts: chemoprophylaxis or "preventive" treatment: it is indicated in patients with tb inactive. the medicine usually prescribed is isoniazid (inh), it stops the bacteria from developing active tb, "preventing" future body damage by tb bacteria. inh is usually taken once a day for 6 to 12 continuous months. treatment of active tb disease: if you do not take preventive treatment at all, or if you do not take it as prescribed, the tb bacillus may "wake up", attack the body and develop an active tb. usually, 2-3 weeks of isolation measures will be instituted until you are not longer contagious, as well as the combination of 2 or 3 medicaments: isonazid, rifampin and/or pyrazinamid. in some cases, the tb treatment is with 4 drugs: the three named above plus ethambutol or streptomycin. can tb disease be cured? yes!. but you most take all your medicines until your doctor tells you to stop. usually the treatment is for 9 or 12 months, however, it can be much longer. if you stop taking your tb medicines, if you keep forgetting to take them, or you only take one of them, the tb bacteria might become resistant to the drugs and you might never be cured. what about tb vaccine? the vaccine for tb, or bcg (bacillus of calmette-guerin), has been limited in its use in children to prevent, with high efficacy (>80%), the serious forms of tb. bcg is not recommended for children and adults who are hiv-infected. to date, a new vaccine against tb is under study. some important points to remember. prevention is better than cure. tb still exists in a lot of countries, including canada. several test are required to determine if the tb bacillus are present in your body, and if the tb is active or not, for example: skin test, chest x-ray and sputum test. you may need a tb skin test for employment, travel, or because you have been in contact with a person who has active tb. keep in mind that sometimes you can develop tb disease several years after you were first exposed. if you are hiv-infected, it is very important to be tested for tb infection at least once a year. if you take your treatment as prescribed you will most likely be cured within a year. keep taking the treatment even if you are feeling better. do not stop it! the only important cause of treatment failure is non-compliance. tb treatment is absolutely free. you have to cover your mouth and your nose while you are coughing or sneezing!! if you want to know more about tb, treatment of tb, etc., feel free to call your doctor, nurse, local health unit, or health department. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo