health services - university of waterloo lactose intolerance lactose is a non-absorbable sugar, named disaccharide, found as a common constituent in the milk, milk sub-products, and others aliments such as infant formula, salad dressings, soups, margarine, baked goods, cake and pancake mixes, syrups, candies, caramels and luncheon meats. under normal conditions the dietary lactose is dissolute, or hydrolyzed, in the second portion of small intestine by a specific enzyme: lactase. lactase hydrolyzes lactose into two mono-saccharides: glucose and galactose, that are ready to be absorbed by the intestine. the absence, total or partial, of the lactase enzyme causes lactose intolerance and leads to diarrhea. this is a chronic diarrhea, and will be present until the intolerance is diagnosed and treated. lactose intolerance in adults is common world-wide, and its incidence is 70-90% in orientals, native americans, indians, jewish, mexicans, blacks, italians, and greeks. lactose intolerance can be: congenital: very rare condition caused by the lack of lactase enzyme from the birth. primary: the most common form. it is due to an apparently normal decrease in the lactase activity, starting around 4 to 5 years of age. though lactase is normally present in adequate quantities in infants, in some people the lactase concentration naturally decline, and is low in a large number of individuals by their teens or early 20's. the primary form is permanent. secondary: it results as an intestinal mucosal damage induced by some previous cause, for example: 1- after an acute illnesses such as viral or bacterial diarrhea. 2- people with giardiasis: infestation by giardia lamblia, an intestinal parasite that produces chronic diarrhea. 3- some inflammatory or ulcerative bowel's diseases. 4- after gastric surgeries. 5- some drugs, especially antibiotics, and those used for the cancer treatment. the secondary form may be transient, depending on the previous cause. also, there are two other types of sugar intolerance: fructose. it is the common citrus fruit sugar, i.e. apples and pears. sorbitol. this sugar is used as a sweetener in "sugar-free" products, such as candies, diet pops, chewing gum, etc. both, fructose and sorbitol, in susceptible people are capable of causing intolerance symptoms if taken in large amounts. what are lactose intolerance symptoms? when the available lactase enzyme is insufficient to digest all the sugar lactose, the non-absorbed sugar remains in the small intestine for an extended period of time, retains fluids and intensifies intestinal movements, producing an abdominal bloating feeling and cramps. the undigested lactose is decomposed by the intestinal flora, producing excessive carbon dioxide and hydrogen gases. these gases contributing to flatulence, meaning an excessive amount of gas in the stomach or intestine, leading to distention of these organs, and increasing the abdominal discomfort, or producing pain. some contributing osmolality changes produce the diarrhea. the symptoms appear after consumption of milk, dairy products, or food containing lactase, even in some cases, after small amounts. diagnosis. do not diagnose yourself. you have to go to your doctor, or dietitian, because there are others intestinal diseases with the same symptoms. the diagnosis, although often established clinically, is confirmed by a lactose tolerance test: breath hydrogen test. lactose intolerance, onset in adults, should be associated with regional enteritis. this is a chronic diarrhea due to gluten intolerance: gluten is a protein present in the wheat and other grains. what about treatment? removing the offending sugar from the diet will often result in the problem remission. however, milk and milk products are valuable foods, recognized as nutritionally complete and they form part of an adequate balanced diet. milk restriction may limit essential nutrients in the diet, such as calcium, riboflavin, niacin, folacin, thiamin, protein, vitamins a, d, and b12 , potassium, magnesium and zinc. calcium and riboflavin are of particular importance because milk and milk products are the primary source of these nutrients. the restriction of milk and dairy products leads to calcium deficiency in the body, and osteoporosis. in this last case the bone loses its calcium producing bone pain, deformities, and fractures easily. in some cases the congenital lactose intolerance form, may lead to a high calcium level in the blood and the formation of kidney stones. the mechanism of this paradoxical situation is unclear. milk from soy-protein, or soy-milk formulas, are excellent cow milk substitutes. the inconvenience is related with its taste. lactose reduced 2% milk is available in many grocery stores. this milk has 90% of lactose reduced and the nutritional value is the same as regular milk. lactase enzyme drops, available at a pharmacy, supply the missing lactase enzyme and do not alter the nutritional value. fifteen drops will convert nearly all of lactose present in 1 liter of regular milk at refrigerator temperature (6oc) in 24 hours. lactase enzyme tablets, also available at a pharmacy, have to be taken just before eating a meal or food containing lactose, or before drinking regular milk. the requirements (5 to 15 drops, or 1 to 3 tablets) may vary between individuals, and the quantity to be eaten or drunken containing lactose. these enzymatic products are usually well tolerated, however, diabetic persons should take special precautions. the new concept of probiotics -living cultures of micro-organisms and contra-parts of antibiotics are used to (re)establish the intestinal flora by stimulating the host immune system of patients with lactose intolerance, however, until now, it is an expensive method. lactose intolerance and milk allergy, are they the same problem? the answer is no. milk allergy symptoms are: skin rash, diarrhea and/or constipation, bronchitis, and blood in stool. this particular allergy is due to an immune response to protein present in the milk and milk products. milk allergy is very rare among adults. some useful tips. drink smaller quantities of milk (1/4-1/2 cup) at one time and spread it throughout the day. drink milk with meals or snacks; avoid drinking it on an empty stomach. whole milk is better tolerated than skim milk. try yogurt, especially without pasteurization, it seems to be helpful and well tolerated. cheeses such as cheddar, gouda, brick, blue, colby, edam, provolone, swiss and mozzarella should be well tolerated. try lactose reduced 2% milk. remember, milk and milk products are valuable and necessary in a balanced diet. calcium deficiency leads to intermittent muscular cramps and osteoporosis. try lactase enzyme drops (add the drops to regular milk 24 hours before drinking the milk); or, try lactase enzyme tablets just before eating milk products or food containing lactose, and enjoy them!!!. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo