health services - university of waterloo skin cancer sun exposure is the only major causative factor for skin cancer for which prevention is feasible. classification. a.  non-melanoma cancer: basal cell carcinoma. squamous cell carcinoma. bowen's disease. paget's disease. both, basal and squamous cell carcinomas are most common in areas sun-exposed: head, neck, hands and forearms. b.  malignant melanoma: is the least common form of sun-induced skin cancer, however, it is the most serious because of its high mortality rate, and also the danger to send early invasion anywhere into the body. melanoma is common in sun-burned areas: ears and back in men, lower legs and back in women. statistical survey. the incidence of skin cancer has doubled with the reports indicating that the depletion of the ozone layer is worsening. it is estimated that 92,000 new cases of melanoma and 2,750,000 new cases of non-melanomas occur world wide each year. in canada, it is estimated there will be over 60,000 new cases of non-melanomas and 3,000 new cases of melanoma this year. the incidence of skin cancer is 29% higher in white males than in white females, and melanoma has been increasing in white populations by 3% to 7% per year over the past 30 years. malignant melanoma is the 3rd cause of death after lung and breast cancers, and it has only one effective form of treatment: early surgery. the melanoma vaccine is still under study. how does sun exposure produce skin cancer? the sunlight contains three types of ultraviolet (uv) rays: uva, uvb and uvc. uva and uvb rays are responsible for the skin damages due to: 1-direct damage on all the skin structures. 2-mutations of the deoxyribonucleic acid (dna), resulting in an altered cell function, or cell death. 3-immuno-suppressive effects on the skin. an example of the last case is the frequency of cold sore (herpes simplex) following intense sun exposure. uva and uvb are both, tumor initiators, and tumor promoters or carcinogenic. the temperature and weather conditions do not affect the intensity of uv radiation, however, uv levels are reduced if there is a thick cloud cover. the sand, water, concrete and snow reflect the uv rays and increases the amount of uv that reaches the skin. risk factors. the probability of developing sunrelated skin cancer is not the same for each individual: genetic factors. there are several phenotypic and genotypic factors of significance in predicting skin cancer development. people with the highest risk factors are those with: eye color, blue or grey; hair color, blond or red; complexion, fair-complexion; tend to freckle and skin's photo-types i and ii. which is your skin's photo-type ? i ------------------------------- always burn, never tan. ii ------------------------------- usually burn, light tan. iii ------------------------------- sometimes burn, always tan. iv ------------------------------- never burn, always tan. v ------------------------------- brown. vi ------------------------------- black. significant risk factors. there are factors that raise the risk of developing skin cancers, such as a changing mole, increased age, family/personal history of melanoma, large numbers of moles -more than 50 in an adult-, ethnicity: european-high risk, hispanic-low, asian and african-very low. other significant risk factors are: chronic cumulative sun exposure, as well as exposure to "sun-tanning" lamps or beds, outdoor work, poor immunologic system, pre-malignant lesions such as warts, especially those located under the nails, and solar keratoses. these lesions are located on the face, more often on the forehead, and appear as result of the chronic skin sun damage. the solar keratoses have round shape, are flesh colored and feel like little patches of sandpaper. another risk factor is the presence of some chemicals in the environment, for example arsenic and polychlorinated biphenols (pcbs). to date, no significant trend has been reported between the use of oral contraceptives and risk of malignant melanoma. dietary factors. a low-fat diet reduces the occurrence of skin cancer. experimental studies have suggested that dietary antioxidants, such as the vitamins e, a, c, and the beta-carotene, may inhibit the growth of melanoma, and that alcohol intake promotes its growth. what about skin cancer and aids? the association between skin cancer and aids is well known. skin cancer seems to grow more rapidly and be more invasive in patients with aids. both, the sunlight exposure, and human papillomavirus infection (genitals warts), have been associated with the development of skin cancer in hiv-infected patients. photo-protection. skin cancer is preventable with the adoption of good photo-protection habits from early childhood, and the modifications of sun-seeking behaviour among adults. the photo-protection should start in infancy, however, it is never too late. the keys for good photo-protection are : common sense. recognition of the risk of sun damage. avoid the midday sun exposure period: between 11 a.m. and 4 p.m. the uv rays reach theirs highest uv levels, especially from early april to late october. adopt shade-seeking habits: umbrellas, trees, canopies, etc. do not rely on the temperature as a guide. avoid the tanning salons, remember that uva rays are carcinogenic, as well as responsible for early skin aging. clothing. must be of a densely woven fabric in order to block light transmission. the color, thickness and type of fabric are less important factors. wide-brimmed hat, long-sleeve shirt, long pants, and sun glasses with uv protection are recommended. sunscreen. sunscreen provides good uvb protection, which is the most active in contributing to the production of skin cancer; also, sunscreen blocks out as much as 50% to 75% of uva light. it is very important to protect all sun-exposed areas: face, neck, ears, hands, etc., by using a sunscreen with sun protection factor (spf) of 15 or higher containing parsol 1789, titanium dioxide or zinc oxide. also it is recommended to use a lip balm with spf of 15 for lip protection. some sunscreen precaution. do not forget that sunscreen does not provide absolute protection. for very fair persons, who burn in five minutes at midday, even an spf of 45 will protect for about two hours only, not the whole day. sunscreens are not effective immediately and they must be applied 30 minutes before sun exposure, and reapplied every two hours, after swimming or high perspiration. waterproof sunscreen can vary from one product to another, you have to read the labels carefully. self screening. early detection is the key to successful treatment. the mortality due to melanoma is clearly related to the depth of the invasion of the tumor when removed. melanomas vary from spots to nodules (like a mole) with colors from flesh tints to black, and frequently a mixture of white, blue, purple and red. the border tends to be irregular and growth may be rapid. when a former or recent mole changes its color, size, borders, surface, that means "red alert" and you must go to your doctor. sometimes the first manifestation of malignancy is a itching mole. take my advice: if you notice something suspicious on your skin, go to the physician immediately. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo