health services - university of waterloo acne acne is a chronic and inflammatory disease that involves the skin sites where the hair originates - hair follicles - and the sebaceous glands. acne may be a life-long process, and usually starts in the preadolescence years. however, it can begin in adulthood or elderly people. areas affected are: face, neck, upper chest, back, and shoulders. acne affects both sexes, males and females. at age 18 acne is more frequent in men than women. beyond the age of 23 it is more common in women. the severe inflammatory form of acne is more often in men at any age. scars rarely occurs in females, except when the lesions are manipulated by the patient. how does acne originate? the increased production of the hormone androgen in puberty, triggers a higher production of sebum by the sebaceous glands in the skin. the sebum is a natural subtract for bacterial growth, and allows the bacteria to increase dramatically in numbers, especially propionibacterium acnes (p.acnes). the sebum is transformed by p. acnes in both, free fatty acids and other chemicals that produce the inflammation process. the combination of increased androgen and pro-inflammatory chemicals causes a higher cohesion of the epidermal cells in the pore areas forming the pimples, becoming the characteristic lesions of acne. there are closed and open pimples: a closed pimple is a closed pore with a tiny plug. an open pimple, also known as a blackhead, is also a closed pore with a larger follicular plug. blackheads are not dirty. the dark colour is due to increased skin pigment and the sebum contacting the oxygen present in the air. the plugged pore can become swollen and inflamed, resulting in a pimple of minor or even major proportions. the leakage of the follicles, in the surrounding skin, produces more inflammation, and creates other lesions of acne, such as cysts, pustules, and abscesses. the hypersensitivity to the inflammatory process caused by p. acnes, is greatest in individuals with genetic predisposition. in other words, the problem is your genes. the same combination of genes that made the person that you are (height, hair colour, eye, etc.), also made your skin the type that it is. in early adulthood the androgen levels decline slowly. this fact may contribute to the resolution of acne in the adulthood period. some updated studies show the deficiency in the vitamin pantothenic acid as the basic cause of acne. what are some symptoms? there are not very many. there may be pain, itching, or mild soreness, and very rarely fever with inflammation and pain in the joints. diagnostic test: bacterial culture: to exclude gramnegative folliculitis, that is an infection produced by a bacteria different than p. acnes. hormonal test: is done when an excess of androgen is suspected. skin biopsy: is necessary to differentiate acne from other diseases. does acne have complications? yes, especially when acne has not been treated. the most important complications are: cyst formation (like a big, hard, and deep closed pimple). severe scarring. psycho-social impact. what about acne treatment? the early treatment prevents complications. the acne treatment depends on the type of lesions and the severity of the acne. no two patients have identical acne. timing of treatment. (do not diagnosis and treat acne by yourself.) the correct treatment prevents permanent scars. most acne treatments takes 6 to 8 weeks to show significant benefits. diet - acne does not occur as a result of food. however, if there is a particular food that aggravates your acne, it makes sense to avoid it. in most of the females affected, acne tends to be worst during the pre-menstrual cycle. long time sun exposure can aggravate acne. do not abandon the treatment before the doctor indicates. acne is not related to dirt. wash gently twice a day with mild soap and water. do not rub, scrub, or wash more often than necessary. it is recommended to avoid exposure to oils and greases. topical treatment: in both sexes, acne in the adults respond very well to treatment. topical treatment can include topical antibiotics, topical retinoids such as tretinoin and iso-tretinoin; benzoyl peroxide, azelaic acid, sulphur, and salicylic acid. systemic treatment: most of the time the systemic treatment, or oral therapy, is reserved for cases of moderate to severe inflammatory acne. in these cases, a combination of topical and oral treatments are indicated. oral treatment may include isotretinoin and/or antibiotics such as tetracycline, erythromycin, clindamycin, sulphas, etc.. hormonal therapy such as oral contraceptives, corticoids etc., may also be useful in adult females with hormonal abnormalities, or acne that does not respond to conventional treatment. notice: the most effective agent to destroy pimples is tretinoin (retinoic acid: accutane-tm). also, it is one of the most powerful teratogens known, this means it has an extremely high risk of serious fetal malformations. do not share this medication with a female friend who also suffers from acne. what about over-the-counter (otc) acne treatment? otc agents are for topical use. most of them contain a low-concentration of benzoyl peroxide. other otcs contain mild drying or keratolytic agents to remove the deposit of dead cells on the skin. otc agents can be helpful for mild acne. they are both, inexpensive and easily accessible, and they come in creams, gels, lotions or soaps. all of them may cause some skin irritation during the beginning of the treatment. do acne scars have treatment? yes. however, it requires hands-on clinical training. most people do not develop scars from their acne. discoloration almost always disappears with time and avoiding sun exposure. your dermatologist will select the best treatment for your acne scarring. what about psycho-social impacts? people with psycho-social problems due to acne, have to be treated by a psychologist or, in some cases, by a psychiatrist. some of the psycho-social impacts are: decreased self-esteem/self-confidence. problems with body image. embarrassment leading to social withdrawal. depression, anxiety. anger. preoccupation with the acne. confusion/frustration with treatment. limitations in lifestyle. difficulties with family members. remember, acne is an important disorder to treat and it should not be dismissed as something trivial or purely cosmetic, also physical well-being has to be treated. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo