health services - university of waterloo chicken pox & shingles chickenpox, also named varicella, is a viral disease acquired via the air when someone inhales the infected droplets released by the ill person, or through direct contact with the lesions. it affects both sexes. although most cases occur in children, chickenpox may occur in adulthood or elderly people. one attack confers permanent immunity, in other words, if you had chickenpox, you will never get chickenpox again. however, this fact is excepted in children infected with hiv; in these cases, chickenpox and shingles, becomes a chronic disease and/or a repeating disease. what are chickenpox symptoms? the first manifestations of disease begin between 10 to 20 days after contagious. this is the period of incubation, this is the time that the virus needs, to grow and spread in the body before manifestations of the disease appear. after the period of incubation, there are, during 1 or 2 days, general symptoms such as high-grade fever ( 39 c or 40 c ); malaise, with loss of appetite, and headaches. at the same time, the first lesions of chickenpox are present in the mouth. then, on the skin, appears the rash, that is more prominent on the face, scalp and trunk. characteristically, the lesions of chickenpox on the skin begin on the trunk, and from here, the lesions spread to other skin surfaces including extremities. how chickenpox lesions change? the evolution of the chickenpox lesion is through different stages: initially the rash, that itches a lot, is characterized by small red spots with rapid change to bumps. this union of spot-bump, changes in a few hours to a small blister. the liquid contained in the blister, initially is clear, however, quickly becomes blurry, and it is highly contagious because it contains the virus that is producing the disease. while the blurry blister begins to dry, sometimes by itself, in the center, it forms a dark and depressing point, until the blurry blister becomes totally dry, and then forms the crust. otherwise, the blurry blister ruptures and the liquid dries, also forming a crust. after the crust falls off, it leaves a small ulcer. if the ulcer is deep, or a secondary infection by a bacteria occurs, it will form a scar. new lesions may appear during the next five days, so all the eruption stages are generally present simultaneously. the crusts usually sloughs off in 7 to 14 days. the total duration from onset of symptoms to disappearance of crusts rarely exceeds 2 weeks. laboratory: some tests are specialized to identify the virus, however, a white cell count below the normal number in a single blood-work, is enough information. and, what about shingles? shingles, also named herpes zoster, is a disease caused by the same virus that causes chickenpox in persons who have experienced chickenpox before. usually, a single and unilateral zone is involved. the trunk is the most involved area, however, shingles can affect the face, especially the ophthalmic zone, or any other part of the body. pain, sometimes very severe, or a feeling of burning skin, may precede the appearance of the skin lesions. these lesions that follow the distribution of a nerve, are similar to chickenpox lesions, and also have the same evolution. complete resolution of the lesions may take 2 to 6 weeks. the post-shingles pain, in the affected area, may last 6 months, especially in elderly people. usually, shingles disease does not repeat. shingles and chicken pox have the same treatment (see below). does chickenpox have complications? yes. 1- secondary bacterial infection of the lesions is common and can lead to pitted scars. 2- also, a deep infection in the skin may occur. 3- up-dated studies show that individuals with chickenpox have a high risk of acquiring flesh-eating disease: an invasive and aggressive bacterial disease with high mortality rate. 4- pneumonia, is another complication, more often in adults, it can lead to severe difficulty in breathing, and some times death. 5- infection in the brain is another grave complication. 6- in immunosuppressed people, for example, individuals with aids, cancer, after organ transplant, etc. chickenpox and shingles, can spread throughout the body, becoming a serious, persistent, recurrent, and fatal infection. prevention: varicella-zoster immune globulin (vzig), a medication used to produce a boost in the immune system of the body, is effective in preventing chickenpox in exposed immunosuppressed individuals, however, vzig is not useful in the treatment against the disease. in general, to prevent chickenpox and shingles, you have to avoid contact with people developing these diseases. something new in the medical field, is the chickenpox vaccine. live attenuated varicella vaccine was licensed in the united states in march 1995 after 15 years of clinical testing. the indications approved by the fda (federal drugs administration - usa -) include healthy children of one year of age or older, and adults, if both, children and adults, do not have a history of chickenpox. children with leukemia can not have the vaccine. it is virtually 100% effective in preventing the severe forms of disease often seen in adults. to date, the chickenpox vaccine is not yet available in canada. what about chickenpox or shingles during pregnancy ? chickenpox rarely occurs during pregnancy. however, affected patients risk not only grave complications such as varicella pneumonia, but also fetal contamination with potentially malformative effects, or severe infection in the newborn, depending on whether the infection occurs, early or late during the pregnancy. for the mother, respiratory distress is the main risk, with mortality reaching nearly 20%. the maternal chickenpox disease seems to be worse in the latter half of pregnancy. for the baby, born underweight, premature delivery and fetal malformations are observed when the fetal infection occurs early, this means, before the end of the fifth month of pregnancy. the manifestation of fetal varicella usually involves several organ systems, such as, skin, ocular (68%), neurologic, digestive, and genito-urinary. unlike chickenpox, there is apparently little or no risk either for the mother or for the child in the case of shingles during pregnancy. treatment: i.- general measures. isolation, of the ill person, is recommended until the crusts have disappeared, and bed rest until the fever is gone. keep the skin clean by means of tub baths or showers except during a fever. calamine lotion externally may help to attenuate the itch. your doctor may also indicate an anti-histamine (medication used for allergies), also for relief of itching, and acetaminophen for relief of fever. aspirin and ibuprofen should be avoided. ii.-treatment of complications. topical antibiotic is indicated if a local and secondary bacterial infection is present. an oral antibiotic is prescribed, if the lesions infected are extensive. antiviral treatment, with a high-dose of acyclovir, should be started early -within 48 hours from onset of eruption- for chickenpox or shingles in immunosuppressed patients, also in the case of ophthalmic shingles, or grave complications. acyclovir seems to be safe and well tolerated during pregnancy. some points to remember: in order to be safe, avoid contact or approaching someone with chickenpox or shingles, especially if you are a pregnant woman. do not share food and drinks with somebody who has the disease. if you get chickenpox or shingles do not scratch the lesions, you have to avoid sun exposure, and avoid spicy and/or hot (chili) foods. cover your nose and mouth while you are sneezing or coughing. if you have had chickenpox, you will never get it again. one or two tub baths a day with oats will be helpful for moisturizing the skin and itch control. there are available, over-the-counter, medicated oat preparations. if you want to know more about chickenpox or shingles feel free to call your doctor, nurse, or your health department. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo