health services - university of waterloo flesh-eating disease necrotizing fasciitis, better known as flesh-eating disease (f-ed), has gained great notoriety in the recent years. f-ed could be lethal not only due its severity, but also, because of the difficulty in diagnosis during its early stages. f-ed is a life-threatening, invasive soft-tissue infection, and potentially fatal. characterized by widespread, faster destruction of the skin and under skin tissues, as well as, the tissues that cover the muscles. it can affect both sexes at any age. what kind of germs produce f-ed? f-ed is produced by different bacteria; however, the bacteria known as group a - streptococci (gas) is the leading f-ed producer. gas is a very aggressive and invasive germ, and it is able to produce another grave disease: streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (stss). note: a syndrome is the union of signs and symptoms that characterize a disease in particular. in ontario, the f-ed rate is about 1.8% cases per 100,000 population per year. about 15% of these cases are associated with stss; however, despite the absence of conclusive proof, this rate may be increasing. the f-ed mortality rate is 30% or higher, and it is correlated with age and health status, early diagnostic and treatment, as well as, development of complications in the patient. what body areas could f-ed affect? anywhere. however, f-ed is common in the head and neck areas, especially eyelids. in these cases, f-ed could have originated from dental, eye, or throat infection; from surgical procedure, or from a post-traumatic origin. legs and arms are other body primary sites. in 70% of the cases, the portal of entry is "open" skin. there is an uncommon form of f-ed: fourmier's gangrene. it is a deadly and rapidly progressive disease located in the bag containing the testicles, and the penis area. it occurs as a result of local trauma, or by extension from a penis infection, as well as, from an anal or deep-anal infection. this particular f-ed is associated with a high mortality rate. a high index of suspicion is essential for early recognition whenever a person presents discomfort and swelling in the testicle bag. what causes the disease? there are different opinions among scientists. some of them believe that f-ed may be caused by a new aggressive factor transferred into strains of gas; other evidence suggests that f-ed and stss are caused by a new gas clone. up-dated studies done by a research group, show that, a toxin released by gas may be the cause. it acts as a super-protein capable of stimulating the body's immune system causing a massive response, that leads to the body's destruction instead of combating the intrusive bacteria. who is at highest risk for f-ed? elderly individuals those with a chronic disease, systemic or local, for example: aids, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, lung disease, etc. alcohol and/or drug users individuals with chickenpox close contact another f-ed case certain predisposing conditions such as traumas, and post-surgical procedures. f-ed is rare in children, but the aggressive cancer treatments could be a high risk factor for them. however, cases of f-ed have developed in healthy people. what are f-ed symptoms? f-ed and stss are classically associated. some people have initially only non-specific symptoms such as pain, vomiting and diarrhea. after this, within 48 to 72 hours or less, the disease becomes worse and, on the affected area of the body, appears severe local pain with systemic high-grade fever and the person feels very ill. then, there are skin changes on the painful area: redness, swelling, large blisters and tissues destruction. the systemic blood pressure comes down, and the patient may develop kidney and liver failures, with external and internal bleeding, severe difficulty in breathing, and redness on all skin surfaces. several laboratory procedures can help doctors in early diagnosis: blood tests, x-rays, aspiration of suspicious lesions, biopsy and culture, magnetic resonance imaging, etc. what about treatment? the key to successful treatment is early diagnosis combined with aggressively cutting off the destroyed tissue, and administration of antibiotics in high doses; oxygen at high pressure is also used. recently, a blood component named plasma from people who had severe f-ed, has been used with success in the treatment of other people developing f-ed or stss. preventing f-ed. health services recommends personal cleaning care, changing underwear every day; washing your hands carefully before eating, and after using the washroom; early medical care of open skin lesions, or eye infections, especially in elderly people. children with chickenpox have to avoid the drug named ibuprofen (learn this name!!). it is recommended to get "preventive medication" if you have had contact with a person developing f-ed. this preventive treatment is an antibiotic oral for 10 days and you must get it without delay to avoid disease transmission. actually, a potential vaccine for f-ed has been successfully tested in mice. who are candidates for preventive treatment? all contacts living in the same household as the ill person. people who had close contact with the ill person, for example classmates. people in close contact with patients who have f-ed or stss. all close contact with persons whose death is due to gas infection. remember. flesh-eating disease is extremely infectious, contagious, with high mortality. discomfort and swelling in the testicles bag: be highly suspicious about f-ed. if you had contact with someone developing f-ed, you have to see your doctor immediately. if you have to get preventive medication, you must use it for the full 10 days. maintain good hygiene habits all the time. if you have a questions or need to know more about f-ed or stss, feel free to call your doctor, nurse, or health department. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo