health services - university of waterloo chlamydial infections chlamydial infections (ci) are the most prevalent of all sexually transmitted diseases (std) in north america, producing infections 2 to 3 times more in people than gonorrhea. ci is caused by the micro-organism chlamydia trachomatis (ct), that causes many different human infections involving genital region, urinary tract, eye, and respiratory tract. particularly frequent in sexually active adolescents, the incidence rate of ci, in canada, is estimated to be 216 per 100,000 people per year. among sexual partners the rate of ci is about 70%. ci affects both sexes, however, females are affected the most and get the worse complications, at short or long term. how do you acquire ci? by direct contact, usually sexual with an infected person. if you get ci you can infect your sex partner(s). who is at high-risk? 1- all sexually active women less than 25 years of age. 2- men or women who have had a new sexual partner, or more than one partner, in the preceding year. 3- women of any age who use non-barrier contraceptive methods. 4- women with itchy vaginal discharge, abnormal vaginal bleeding, and experience painful intercourse. 5- men with itchy penis discharge. other factors associated with increased risk are: two or more sexual partners per year, drug users -including alcohol-, low social and economical status, and gonorrhea in the past year. manifestations of disease. after the contagion, the disease manifestations can occur between 2 to 6 weeks, or be much more longer. a: infection among women. most of the ci (60% to 80%) among women are without symptoms. there are often ci associated with other stds, especially gonorrhea: an estimated 44% to 79% of women with gonorrhea also have an infection with ct. the association of ct with human papilloma virus (genital warts) is a predisposing factor for developing genital cancer. the symptoms of ci depend on the affected region: when the womb vaginal portion -cervix- is infected, there is purulent vaginal discharge, lower abdominal pain, inter-cycle or post-intercourse bleeding, and pain during or after intercourse. lower abdominal pain, acute or chronic, if the infection is located in the womb, or fallopian tube(s). ct may produce pelvic inflammatory disease(pid) that is characterized by abdominal pain, shivering or shaking with high-grade fever, purulent vaginal discharge, womb tenderness, vomiting, and pelvic abscess. women with acute pid should be hospitalized. the chronic form is characterized by pain with menstrual cycles, sore intercourse, infertility, recurrent low-grade fever, and tender mass in the lower abdominal region. pid has increased its incidence in the recent years due to the rise in stds, and pid is most common in young and sexually active women with multiple partners. when the affected region is the urethra - canal conveying urine from the bladder to the exterior of the body - the symptoms are burning pain during urination and urinary frequency, often with turbid, foul-smelling or dark urine, and lower abdominal discomfort. this infection is named urethritis. pain and tenderness in liver area when the infection is located in this region. ct may produce severe pelvic infection after an abortion. ci has been associated with long term complications: chronic pid, infertility (64% of infected women), and pregnancy arising outside of the womb (42% of infected women). in this last situation the fetus is not viable. what about ci during pregnancy? first of all, you need to know that ci may cause recurrent abortion, this means, the loss of 3 or more pregnancies in succession. ci is often asymptomatic in the mother. the prevalence of ct among pregnant women is between 5% to 25%. prenatal ci has been associated with premature rupture of the layers surrounding the fetus in the womb, premature delivery, or delivery of a dead child. the newborn can acquires ci through contact with the maternal infected genital discharge at birth, and may develop an eye infection in 18% to 50% of cases, and/or a lung infection in 11% to 20% of cases, both during the first year. b: infection among men. it is estimated that 1% to 21% of all men with ci are asymptomatic carriers of the infection, and may act as reservoirs that spread the disease. disease symptoms depend on the affected area, for example: manifestations of urethritis, when the urethra is infected. (see above). if ci is located in the bag that contain the testicles the symptoms are sudden pain and redness of the bag with marked swelling in the painful testicle, and a cord-like structure located in the bag. this cord-like structure is the tube for transit of sperm from testicles to penis. another affected region is the prostate -gland in males which surrounds the bladder- symptoms are pain in the lower abdominal and back areas, fever, and burning pain during urination. c: infection in males and females. eye infection. males and females with genital ci can infect the eye(s) through finger contact, or by direct contact with genital discharge. this eye infection, or conjunctivitis, may become chronic and lead to formation of abnormal tissue on the eye and blindness. conjunctivitis due to ct is the major cause of blindness worldwide. manifestations of the eye infection are: eye redness, itching, tearing, and purulent discharge. in both sexes, ct is able to produce infection in the groin area, often bilateral, characterized by a large and inflamed lymph node, with the tendency to fuse, soften, and break down to form multiple draining channels, permitting the escape of pus, and leading to extensive scarring. other symptoms in this particular situation are: fever, bone pain, arthritis, skin rashes, as well as, eye and brain infections. inapparent infection and latent disease are common in promiscuous individuals. when ci is located in the anus region, or beyond, it produces anus-rectal pain, mucus-purulent or bloody discharge, pain with bowel movements, constipation or diarrhea, fever, and abdominal cramping. laboratory. some laboratory tests are available to confirm if ct is causing the infection. your doctor will decide which is the most convenient. what about ci treatment? the ci treatment is with antibiotics. tetracycline is the drug of choice among non-pregnant women and among men. in pregnant women and patients for whom tetracycline is unable to be prescribed, erythromycin or amoxicillin is recommended. the treatment length is 10 to 14 days. the recent introduction of azithromycin has allowed a single-effective-dose therapy in non-complicated cases. prevention. only abstinence or a stable monogamous relationship between two uninfected partners can assure the avoidance of ci and other stds. barrier contraceptive devices, specifically latex condoms, provide the best alternative to abstinence by preventing direct contact with genital lesions or secretions; however, the protection is not 100%. answering these questions, will give you an idea about your std risk: are you sexually active? how many partners have you had during the past couple of years? have your partners been men, women, or both? what have you been doing to avoid stds? some important tips to remember. "to prevent is better than to treat." ci is frequently without symptoms, and often associated with other stds. women can get the worst ci complications: chronic pelvic pain, infertility, pregnancy outside of the womb, recurrent abortion, and ill or dead newborns. sexual partners must be screened, and treated to break down the infection link. take the treatment strictly as prescribed until finished, and avoid drinking alcohol while you are taking antibiotics. return for follow-up visits as requested by your doctor or clinic. it is recommended to stop sexual activity until medication is finished. to prevent stds, you have to use barrier methods of contraception, particularly latex condoms. be forewarned about the dangers of high-risk sexual partners. if you want to know more about ci, if you are worried about a std, please feel free to call your doctor or health department. your health is important to us, we are working for you. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo