health services - university of waterloo campus health initiatives history of campus health promotion at uw in 1977 c.h.p. (campus health promotion) was established to promote the well-being of people on campus. this project was involved in many educational activities, like weight loss and smoking cessation programs and coronary risk screening. lack of ongoing funding meant the end of c.h.p. in 1984. then in 1995 the c.h.i.p. (campus health initiatives project) was rolled out when co-op students, tanja hartmann and later sharon duff, conducted a survey to figure out in what areas the campus community felt they needed help to enhance their health. a report may be found in the resource centre of health services. the health survey was implemented in the fall of 1995, and polled undergrad and grad students, faculty and staff. undergraduate students filled out a survey during a class; grads, faculty and staff were sent surveys through the mail. the survey was basically a tool to determine where and how people wanted to make lifestyle changes and in which areas people were satisfied with their own activities. knowing that people are interested in eating in a more healthful way, for example, means that many promotion efforts will be directed towards this, and other areas where people have shown a need. this resource effective way of doing health promotion makes sense for today's campus community. so what did the survey tell us about students, faculty and staff? first of all, 7.3% of and anticipated 10% of undergrad students were surveyed. there was a very good response rate to the mailed surveys, 16.8% of grad students and 22.6% of faculty and staff replied. in total 2605 surveys were completed. one of the survey's first questions asked people to rate their own health. almost 63% of all the respondents rated their own health as excellent or very good but almost all would like to do at least one thing to maintain or improve their health. grad students reported having excellent or very good health most often (of the three groups surveyed), with 72% of grads falling in these categories. is the university of waterloo healthy? well, 62% of respondents report eating healthier, and 58% say they are exercising regularly. another major area of focus was learning to cope better with worry or stress, with 38% of people saying they were doing that. about 20% of undergrad and grad students say they are drinking less alcohol, and 18% of undergrads report practicing healthier sexual behaviour. ten percent of people said they were doing nothing to enhance health. do people use health enhancement services on campus? for the proportion of people using and being aware of on campus cervices, the department of athletics and recreational services came out tops. respondents were most aware of department of athletics and almost half of respondents say that they are using services like the pac and campus rec. health services and counseling services look pretty good here too. people also use off campus health enhancement services. more than a quarter of respondents use health clubs or are members of sports teams off campus. eight percent use some kind of alternative medicine found off campus. the survey asked what people would like to do in the next year to enhance or maintain their health. the greatest number (79%) of respondents say that exercising regularly is something they would like to start or continue to do. eating healthier, learning to cope with worry or stress and losing weight were also behaviours that people wanted to start in the next year. so we know that most people consider themselves pretty healthy, are engaging in healthy behaviours, but would to do more to keep themselves healthy and fit. most people feel they are stopped (69%) from making lifestyle changes because they are too busy or have a lack of time. overwhelmingly, people felt that this was a barrier to making healthy changes in their lives. cost (20%), as well as residence or home life (15%) were reported as being things that stop people from making changes to better health. people felt that environments like "with a buddy" or "individually" would be the best for health enhancement. self-help reading material was reported as being the best method to make lifestyle changes, as well as workshops and articles in newspapers or newsletters. to make health enhancement more accessible, respondents stated most often (55.1%) that they wanted uw to provide more information on services that already exist. what about c.h.i. (campus health initiatives)? one of the main goals of c.h.i. is to provide a starting point for people looking for health resources on campus. so what is a health resource? well, there are tons of them right here on campus, like the pac and bmh. others like counseling services can help you out with stress or procrastination, the safety office can teach you about lab safety and eap is a program to support uw employees. believe it or not all of these things can contribute to your overall health. so if you're wondering what the best brand of cornflakes is, we can't help you, but we will be able to point you towards where health resources exist. maybe you'd like to know more about preparing for exams but don't know how to go about getting that information, c.h.i. could tell you about counseling services who provides a workshop on exam preparation. c.h.i. is part of the health services web-site. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo