health services - university of waterloo warts along skin, dermis forms bump-like or ""papillas" projecting them to epidermis like pillars supporting a building. warts are produced by the virus, human papilloma virus (hpv), that causes in the papilla abnormal growth outward (papillomas). there are over 60 different hpv types, and they can affect the skin anywhere, as well as tissues covering cavities and some surfaces such as nose, mouth, anus, penis, and vagina. how do you get warts? hpv infection is a sexually transmitted disease (std) associated, especially, with cervix changes and cancer. warts are both, the viral infection on the genitals and the std most common among adolescents, followed by the chlamydial infection, gonorrhea, and trichomonas. however, the contagion is not only a std. you may get warts by contact of your hands, or other parts of your body , with warts who somebody has; by sharing shoes or socks with someone who has warts on the soles of their feet; or in a public shower. if you have warts, you can spread them yourself on other part of your body, by scratching your warts and then scratching your skin somewhere else (auto-inoculation). the same thing is for the hand-finger-mouth, and hand-anus-genitals routes. hpv affects males and females, at any age group. warts have devastating psychological effects in some people. new warts cases are increasing every day. what about symptoms? the diagnosis is usually straight forward. most of the time there are no symptoms. however, tenderness or pain upon pressure occurs with plantar warts; itching, with anal or genital warts; and nail warts are quite painful. occasionally, warts may produce mechanical obstruction when they are located in the nose, ear canal, larynx, urinary canal. types of warts. warts vary widely in shape, size, appearance, and there are different types of warts: common warts. the most common hpv infection. they are hard papillomas with dry and rough surface, skin color and round shape, and can be an isolated lesion or formed in groups. sites of predilection: hands, fingers, knees (traumas sites). plane warts. these small warts are flat and located on face or hands. skin colored or light brown; round, oval, or polygonal shape; always numerous and forming close set. plantar warts. on the plantar and palmar surfaces, warts tend not to grow outward but instead downward. they are most common in female adolescents, especially public locker room users, and, with higher risk, public shower users. athletes are often affected. these kind of warts are frequently mistaken for calluses. nail warts. they have same shape as common warts, and can grow sub-ungual or peri-ungual. nail warts may destroy the nail and they are difficult to treat. oral warts. hpv causes a variety of papillomas in the oral mucous tissues and even in the larynx. they have in general a velvet-like shape and white color. genital warts. including perianal warts, they are the most outstanding of all warts types, not only because their easy sexual transmission, but their potential transformation in cancer, especially in women. it is alarming that 93% of cervical cancer cases are associated with the presence of warts, and 25% or more of abnormal papanicolaou smears have a similar association. in women, hpv genital infection may causes sterility and infertility. genital warts are transmitted to newborn via passage along the contaminated genital area. the child may get complications early or later in life. a number of children with laryngeal papillomas have developed cancer of the larynx. genital warts, also named condylomas, are soft, skin colored, pink or red, pin-head warts or fleshy warts in cauliflower-like masses. they flourish on moist semi-destroyed surface, smelling bad, or on dry surfaces. usually in clusters, genital warts are highly contagious, sexual and non-sexual transmitted. warts can appear 4-6 wee after contagion, or in a few days, as well as soon after the intercourse. it take months to grow and affect anywhere on the genital and/or anus areas. perianal warts are more common in homosexual/bisexual men, and the lesions become worse in patients with aids. what about malignant transformation? the long term consequences of hpv infection are more serious in females than males. malignant transformation is caused by some types of hpv, especially in vulva, vagina and cervix areas. the association of chlamydia and hpv is a predisposing factor in cervico-uterine cancer. smoking is other cofactor in the development of cervical cancer: some studies confirm this theory by founding significant levels of nicotine in cervical mucus. malignant conversion of perianal warts may occur in some cases, as well as from nail warts or from plantar warts. papillomas in the mouth , and in the larynx may become cancer. hpv is associated with development of skin cancer in hiv infected people. treatment. although more than 50% of warts resolve spontaneously within 2 years, often after suggestion, many, if untreated, may spread and cause considerable discomfort, and cancer risk. on skin warts the treatments are: cryotherapy: warts are freezing with liquid nitrogen. electrocautery: after local anesthetization the wart is burned followed for surgical scrape. keratolytic agents: used to peel off the wart tissue, such as salicylic acid and lactic acid. on plantar warts, salicylic acid is used in high concentration -40%-, and the electrocautery or surgery is avoided because the lesion may grows again with painful scar. pulsed dye laser is a highly effective and safe method, without damaging the surrounding skin, used to destroy rebellious warts, this mean, these warts that failed to respond to keratolytic or destructive treatment. flat warts are the most responsive to dye laser treatment. immunotherapy with dinitro-chloro-benzene (dncb) is useful in resistant, and/or numerous warts. dncb produces a boost of warts antibodies. tretinoin, commonly used for acne treatment, seems to be effective for facial or bread warts. the different forms of treatment for genital warts remains frustrating due at high recurrence rate associated with all modalities, particularly in women if vaginal discharge is present. the treatment should be multiple: cryotherapy, laser, surgery, immunotherapy, etc. podophyllin (25%) and its newer form podofilox, is commonly used on anogenital warts with excellent results. it is applied at weekly intervals and allowed to dry 4-6 hours before being washed off. podophyllin and podofilox are not used during pregnancy, and they have very bad response, due to its high recurrence (67%), on skin warts. immunotherapy treatment with interferon represent a promising new treatment, especially on resistant and extensive warts. with this method the recurrence rate is very low. recently, 5-fluoracille cream, utilized locally as prophylactic, after cleared the lesions, seems to give excellent results. other new medicament to treat anogenital warts is imiquimod cream, topical during 16 weeks, seems to be successful too. prevention. even once the lesion(s) has been fully cleared, there remains a small but real risk of hpv transmission to a partner. there is no anti-wart vaccine. high risk factors for hpv are the same for any std and aids: early age at first sex. age 15-25 and sexually active. alcohol and drug users. prostitution. homosexual/bisexual men. previous history of std. more than 3 sexual partners in the last year. recent change of sexual partner unprotected sex with a bisexual man. unprotected anal sex. pregnant adolescent. high levels of psychosocial problems. healthy prevention, or healthy sex habits means: adopting responsible behavior, looking at issues of self-esteem, delaying sex, negotiating latex condom use with a new partner, learning to "just say no". some points to remember. avoid contact with warts, do not scratch them. wear your own sleepers in a public locker room or in a public shower. if you have hand, finger or nail warts, do not bite your nails. if you participate in athletic activities, protect your hands by wearing weight-lifter gloves. women with genital warts or who have a partner with genital warts, keep to a regular schedule of pap. screaming. hpv infection increase the risk of genital cancer, especially cervix-uterus cancer. when warts are visible, using a latex condom will prevent transmission, but it won't protect all areas. what do you think happens to the contagion when genital warts are located in non-visible areas??. sexual partner(s) should also be evaluated and treated to break down the infection link. cigarettes smoking may delays successful results from treatment. be aware of high risk sexual transmitter disease partners. self-esteem and responsible behavior are the keys for std and aids prevention. more information?  do you need warts treatment? please, feel free to call your doctor, nurse or your health department. your health is very important to us. last update april 03, 2001 this page maintained by chris strome. copyright © university of waterloo