gauley river rafting :: gauley river whitewater rafting trips and tours in west virginia contact us     meet songer     book it now     e-postcards     free wallpaper our trips new river gauley river lower gauley upper gauley overnight trips hi-adventure map and directions contact us adventure packs rock climbing mountain biking horseback riding lodging packages fishing packages food service map and directions contact us general info online brochure general info reservations songer store cancellations liability waivers gift certificates map and directions message boards weather faq special savings boatload bonus gift certificates group discounts monthly special cyber special map and directions contact us send this page to a friend!(click here!) gauley river rafting trips gauley river rafting in west virginia. the gauley river in west virginia (wv) is known as one of the most exciting whitewater rafting desinations in the world. designated as the gauley river national recreation area, part of the national park service system, the gauley river canyon is truly a world-class adventure travel and recreation destination. beginning the first weekend after labor day the u.s. army corp of engineers begins releasing water from summersville lake into the gauley river streambed. this annual water realese, known as "gauley season", transforms southern west virginia into the whitewater capital of the world! spring and summer gauley rafting trips are also available. whitewater rafting trips on the gauley river in wv are rated in the world's top ten best rafting trips. the 26-mile stretch of whitewater, which begins at the base of summersville dam, is divided into two outstanding sections of whitewater rafting. the upper gauley is a class v+ section of west virginia whitewater that is full of huge drops, waves and long rapids. the lower gauley is a scenic class v whitewater rafting adventure filled with outstanding whitewater rapids, roller-coater waves and large runnable holes. whichever section of the gauley river you choose, you are sure to find some of the most exciting whitewater rafting available in the united states. for those of you who like to push the envelope be sure to check out our high adventure gauley river rafting trips. these raft trips have a lower guide to guest ratio, smaller boats....and big thrills! contact us | book it now | meet songer new river | gauley river | family whitewater | hi-adventure lodging packages | fishing packages | family packages | food service general info | reservations | songer store | cancellations | liability waivers gift certificates | map & directions | message boards | weather our partners | boatload bonus | group discounts monthly specials | cyber special | faq click here for homepage gauley river rafting - songer whitewater po box 300 fayetteville, wv 25840 1-800-356-7238 info@gauley-river-rafting.com © 2000 songer whitewater :: gauley river rafting. site map site by citynet