red canyon river trips - cody, wyoming 1-800-293-0148 are you ready for some whitewater red canyon river trips was hired by walt disney to aid in the production of the movie "meet the deedles" which was released in the spring of 1998. red canyon river trips takes pride in having the most experienced guides on the shoshone river. with 27 years of history on the shoshone, our professional river guides are dedicated to offering a quality adventure full of fun and excitement, always with your safety as their priority. sharing their knowledge and expertise about the river and its surroundings is an important part of all our trips. cody country is rich in history and our boatmen take pleasure in sharing it with you. you'll travel through time, back to the days of mountain men, native americans and outlaws. we at red canyon river trips take pride in our honesty and integrity. when we say that you will have a whitewater experience of a set distance, that is exactly what we give you. we believe that you should get every foot of whitewater you pay for ... no exceptions! unfortunately this is not always the case with all river float companies. we feel that it is important for companies to provide you with the exact mileage you will be traveling. we at red canyon have accurate maps available for you to check before choosing your river route. please feel free to stop in and compare or just say "howdy." unequaled by other outfitters, the success of your trip is due to the excellent staff who are truly interested in making your visit a safe and pleasant one. thanks again for floating with us. we offer four different trips to suite your rafting needs: trip #1 - the shoshone canyon trip #2 - north fork trip #3 - the clark's fork of the yellowstone trip #4 - inflatable kayak trip getting ready for your trip! what to wear - we suggest sunglasses and sunscreen, a t-shirt, shorts, and shoes that can get wet. can't swim - we take nonswimmers. all occupants are required to wear u.s. coast guard approved life vests. children - we welcome children on all trips. this is a family experience. however, age limits may vary with different water levels. weather conditions - we provide foul weather gear if needed. reservations - we do require reservations to insure your seat. location - our office is located 2 blocks west of the us 14a & us 14/16/20 intersection, across the street from shoshone national bank at 1374 sheridan ave. (cody's main street). to insure the quality of your trip we provide: round trip transportation to and from the river rain jackets and pants rooms to change in coast guard approved life jackets more information about cody, wyoming is available.