white water river rafting, tubing, kayaking, canoeing, biking, team building and fishing, shenandoah and potomac river - harpers ferry, west virginia - river riders rafting & kayaking :: tubing :: canoe trips :: fishing trips about us river trips the kayak shack kayak instruction accommodations biking trips brochure request location reservations site map summercamps team building faq employment river riders, inc rr 5 box 1260 harpers ferry, wv 25425 800-326-7238 304-535-2663 304-535-2610 (fax) trips@riverriders.com reservations made before march 1st receive 2001 pricing. 15% off the retail price of all in-stock items at the kayak shack. we are currently taking reservations for our outdoor adventure summer camps. in its october 2001 “best of” issue outside magazine rated harpers ferry, west virginia as one of america’s top five city getaways for rafting, tubing, kayaking, and canoeing adventures. about river riders only one hour from the d.c. and baltimore metro regions, river riders delivers the finest white water rafting, tubing, kayaking, canoeing, mountain biking, and fishing adventures on the beautiful shenandoah and potomac rivers (class i-iii) in harpers ferry, west virginia. we also guide rafting trips on other world famous whitewater runs: the north branch of the potomac (class ii-iii+), the new river gorge national river (class iv), and the gauley river national recreation area (class v-v+), all in west virginia, and western maryland’s upper youghiogheny (class v). for those with tranquility in mind, river riders offers spring time canoe and bike trips on west virginia’s greenbrier river. interested in whitewater trips abroad? river riders has run guided whitewater rafting and kayaking trips throughout the americas using our extensive network of guides and outfitters. let river riders arrange your next outdoor adventure. river riders is a licensed professional white water guide service. our company’s founder started guiding paddlesports professionally in 1964, giving river riders 38 solid years of dedication to guest service. using this expertise and the best adventure equipment available, we run all trips in a safe, personable manner. when you raft with us, you raft with friends. we pride ourselves on superior guest service. river riders is licensed by the west virginia division of natural resources. we’re also active members of many paddling associations-america outdoors, west virginia professional river outfitters, and the professional paddlesports association-and conservation organizations-american rivers, american whitewater affiliation, american canoe association, west virginia rivers coalition, and friends of the shenandoah river. about our guides our guides separate us from the competition. with experience on world-class whitewater runs in north, central, and south america, our staff leaders have the seasoned skills and know-how to provide you with the safest and most enjoyable trip possible. the guides pride themselves on your positive experience. the west virginia division of natural resources certifies all guides at river riders. north branch of potomac :: greenbrier river :: new & gauley trips :: upper yough ©2001 river riders site designed and hosted by citynet