alaska fishing trip with discount guided fishing and lodging. alaska fishing trip with discount lodging  & fishing vacation packages on the kenai river! englishchinese simplifieddutcheuropean spanishfinnishfrenchgermanitalianjapaneselatin american spanishrussianspanishswedish planning an alaska fishing trip? the kenai peninsula is a world famous destination for an  alaska fishing trip and a fishermans paradise for salmon, halibut and trout. on a kenai peninsula alaska fishing trip you can fish for five species of salmon, monster halibut and trophy rainbow trout from may to october! our standard week long alaska fishing trip package includes your lodging and 3-6 days of guided fishing. you pick your own guided fishing vacation package and number of alaska fishing trips you want in the package! fish salmon, halibut & trout from may to october on the kenai! your alaska fishing trip can begin in may when cook inlet king salmon and red salmon start their annual spawning migration up the kenai and kasilof rivers as well as other streams on the kenai peninsula. alaska halibut also begin their migration into cook inlet and kachemak bay at this time. our alaska fishing lodge is located right in the center of the kenai peninsula near soldotna, alaska and right on the kenai river! we have easy access to homer for halibut fishing and other saltwater fishing in kachemak bay. we  have fly in alaska fishing trips to remote spots on the kenai peninsula and day fly in alaska fishing trips to select rivers on the remote west side of cook inlet for red and silver salmon! we have alaska fishing trip vacation packages at discount prices with something for everyone and their budget. we are your best source for group or family fishing vacations! your fishing vacation package includes professional guides and all fishing equipment! your alaska fishing trip will include the services of professional alaska fishing guides, saltwater charter captains, and pilots who know how to make your alaska fishing trip an experience you will remember. your alaska fishing trip will include all the equipment, bait and tackle necessary for successful alaska fishing trip. on our guided alaska fishing trips we offer driftboats, powered river sleds, and alaska proven saltwater fishing boats in our alaska sport fishing fleet. add a fly in fishing trip to your alaska fishing vacation package! your alaska fishing trip package can also include one of the several different fly in fishing trips. this alaska fishing trip includes a flight on an alaska bush plane on floats and a guide with a power boat on the remote river you fly in to. the day long fishing trip is generally a highlight of our fishing vacation packages beause not only do you get the unique experience of the adventure you will generally see a lot of alaska wildlife including the great alaska brown bears! accommodations and guided fishing at discount prices! all alaska fishing trip vacation packages include 7 nights lodging in a private cabin that is fully equipped with all modern conveniences and high quality matresses for your comfort after a hard day of fishing. all cabins can easily accommodate up to six adults so you can have a real travel budget friendly alaska fishing vacation. the best part is that your cabin is on private kenai river front property for the exclusive use of guests who want to extend their fishing day! click here for our most popular fishing vacation packages call toll free: 1 800 770 3701 click here to learn about alaska bears click here for alaska fishing maps & books click here for information about alaska fishing click here for information about the kenai [fishing packages] [links]