campbell river fishing - nootka sound fishing - rippingale's salmon fishing - vancouver island, bc, canada campbell river - nootka sound - vancouver island bc salmon fishing charters with andrew rippingale's fishing charters ----------------- local knowledge for local waters ---------------- famous grouse charters since 1980 email: info@rippingalesfishing.com street & mailing address: a. rippingale 2330 steelhead road campbell river, bc canada v9w 4p5 telephone: 250-286-7290 toll-free: 1-800-988-8242 experience the thrill of landing a chinook salmon of over 30 pounds - "tyee!" ~~~ come fishing with andrew rippingale! enjoy the comfort of 24' cruisers while sportfishing for salmon and halibut in campbell river, or on the spectacular west coast of vancouver island, british columbia, canada. sportfishing success is what keeps our guests coming back year after year. we employ only experienced guides with proven track records. our fully insured, professional guides have a minimum of 15 years experience on local waters. our boats are carefully outfitted with the latest in electronics, quality fishing tackle and safety gear. we boast a 90% return clientele of corporate groups, couples and single anglers. many of our guests haven't missed a single sportfishing season in 12-14 years! campbell river provides an opportunity to catch all five salmon species as well as species of trout. salt water winter chinook fishing can be combined with a fresh water steelhead trip as well. the nootka sound area on the west coast of vancouver island, bc, offers trophy chinook salmon as well as halibut, red snapper and ling cod. we offer competitive charters, rates and packages! excellent references are available upon request. helicopter fishing and boat wrangler rates are also available. campbell river - fishing packages include ocean-front resort cottage accommodations and fishing each day with boat, guide, tackle, fuel and bait. let us put together a package for your corporate group or incentive program. rates are available upon request! check out a local b&b choice west coast - fishing packages include all meals, floating lodge accommodations and fishing each day with boat, guide, tackle, fuel and bait. vancouver island offers an abundance of eagles, seals, sea lions and black bears; wild life always makes a fishing trip more interesting. pacific whitesided dolphins, orcas (killer whales) and sea otter sightings are also common in our waters. contact andrew rippingale for more information! toll free 1-800-988-8242 visit our main site for full details on your next fishing adventure! campbell river page | bc fishing page | bc main page visits: 1977