salmon river's fishing trips: steelhead, fly-fishing, sturgeon, chukars our salmon river fishing, chukar hunting, & trip details. fall season spring season fly fishing • steelhead chukar hunting sturgeon welcome to idaho's salmon river • world class fishing! natsoh koos river outfitters on idaho's salmon river canyons specializes in helping you make the most of your angling experience on idaho's yet undiscovered fishery of unparalleled quality and beauty. the salmon river offers a grand array of fishing opportunities. smallmouth bass, rainbow trout, sea run steelhead, channel catfish, and white sturgeon. sturgeon are the largest fresh water fish on earth. this tremendous fishery is located on the last 52 miles of the main salmon river in northwest central idaho. quality is our second name, and it is reflected in our equipment, guides, service, fine western cuisine, and wild fish tales told in camp. fly fishing for rainbow trout is from 16 foot whitewater rafts rigged with custom fly fishing platforms. we provide all the fishing equipment except for the fly fishing gear, as we know yours will fit you better. this portion of the salmon river is only fishable by boat. we use don hill wooden drift boats to get you to the best steelhead spots, pulling plugs or drifting. white sturgeon trips offer bank fishing, with camping at a good sturgeon hole at night. late august is great for small-mouth bass from rafts. two fishermen per boat and a guide on all trips except for the sturgeon fishing. low elevation makes for good warm weather even in late november, and as early as the first part of march. camping is comfortable. our camps feature heated wall tents, hot water showers, high quality sleeping gear and tents, the best in western cuisine, with impeccable service. the local fishing guides we use are full-time professionals, making them the best available in the area. if you are a fly fisherman, driftboat steelheader, or a big game angler, we will customize a trip for you. give us a call and arrange one of idaho's best fishing adventures for you or your group. jim & laura owners/outfitters (800) 539-3963 traveler's directions whether you are traveling north or south in idaho, on us highway 95, you will want to stay in grangeville the night before your fishing trip. •  going north from boise, idaho, take us interstate 84 to the fruitland exit, some 60 miles west of boise. head north on us 95 to grangeville, about 180 miles. •  traveling south from spokane, washington or lewiston, idaho, grangeville is located 75 miles south of lewiston on us 95 upon booking your river adventure we will send you additional trip information and recommended lodging in grangeville. – call us for dates & current information – home | introduction | river trips | business retreats | fishing adventures schedules | trip details | salmon river | idaho map | outfitter's message | contact us email natsoh koos river outfitters copyrighted © 1997 by natsoh koos river outfitters.