west virginia - ace whitewater and adventure center easy whitewater the warm water, mild rapids, and spectacular scenery of the upper new river make it the ideal setting for family fun. kids as young as five will enjoy swimming, splashing, playing and bouncing through the gentle class i, ii, and iii rapids. older folks appreciate the upper new's easy pace and gorgeous mountain setting. join us for a day of pure, wholesome family enjoyment. upper new river the very scenic "prince canyon" section of the upper new river is the perfect setting for the "young-at-heart" of all ages. bouncy waves and beginner-friendly rapids are enjoyed with a variety of topnotch inflatable boats. relax and paddle together in a guided unsinkable raft or challenge the rapids in a 1 or 2-person inflatable boat called a "ducky". even if you are shy about trying rafting, you can enjoy the river in complete confidence as your professional guide shows you the way on this wonderful family river. adventure links whitewater trips lodging why choose us? contact us reservations/information directions "industry-standard" trips all our competitors use 16-foot, 10-man rafts as their standard boats. at ace, our standard raft is a 14-foot, 7-man boat, and a smaller boat gives you a much bigger ride! but, in order to be competitive with the other folks, we also offer trips using larger boats. on these trips, you get a more conservative ride than you would expect from our standard trip using the smaller 14-foot rafts. but you still get several of the exclusive ace extras, use of our 1,400-acre outdoor center, and the best guides on the river. because of the larger boats and more conservative ride, we have a minimum age of 12 in june and july and a minimum of 10 when the river drops to its august levels. back to top exciting whitewater the world's second oldest river, west virginia's new river, has carved a spectacular 1000-foot deep canyon through some of the country's most awesome scenery, and provided the setting for the east's finest whitewater rafting. in 1978, congress established the new river gorge national park to preserve this true national treasure. even if you have never rafted before, join us on the new river this summer. lower new river - 'big water action' on the new river, a relaxed morning pace gives way to huge rolling waves and some of the east's best 'surfing holes'. in spring, you will thrill to the biggest waves in the east, while in summer, it is roller coaster waves and fabulous 'surfing holes'. fall brings crisp autumn days and spectacular colors to the lower new river's big waves and surf holes. whenever you come, the new river is one of the country's finest whitewater rafting rivers. double lower double the action! double the fun! run the best part of the new river twice in a single day. talk about action, this trip runs 16 miles and has over 30 great rapids! lower new river gung-ho by early june, the awesome springtime levels of the new river have returned to normal. now it is time to play! our gung-ho trip uses small, agile 12-foot rafts for the new river's wildest ride. you will run routes and surf holes that others only look at, and you will be the envy of everyone else on the river! back to top extreme whitewater west virginia has it all! exciting whitewater on the new river and extreme whitewater on the gauley river! ace's 'team extreme' is a collection of some of the country's best guides, driving the type of specialized, hi tech equipment you need to run the gauley in the summer. these trips are run in an instructional format, allowing the guide to actually teach river running skills to the crew as part of the trip. remember though, this type of rafting is definitely not for everybody, so leave the couch potatoes at home and come on and join the team. twin rivers running the gauley all summer long lets us offer our guests a truly unique experience, two of the country's best rivers right here in west virginia. a day on the lower new river and a day in inflatable kayaks on the upper gauley gives you a trip you will find nowhere else. upper gauley - spring and summer since we pioneered the upper gauley in the spring and summer, our guides are the ultimate experts on this incredible run. summertime flows make the upper gauley's legendary rapids even steeper and more challenging. this trip is not for everybody but, if you have what it takes, it is the ride of a lifetime. the upper gauley is run in rafts or ducks, depending on the water level. may-aug