adventure vacation whitewater rafting steelhead fishing rogue klamath oregon our company our guides equipment safety first testimonials gift certificates contact us rogue river upper klamath lower klamath cal-salmon/scott rivers owyhee river river ratings our gourmet meals get ready to raft reservation / cancellation policy salmon fishing steelhead fishing family vacation / family reunion school / youth groups corporate / team building physically challenged church groups senior groups map and location information points of interest airport information links to area web sites experience white water rafting in southern oregon !! white water rafting and steelhead fishing vacations begin with rogue klamath river adventures in medford, oregon, near klamath falls. whether you're planning a family whitewater vacation or wanting a corporate team building wilderness adventure, you've come to the right spot. we organize river trips for groups of any size, ages 8 to 88 and all abilities. our experienced and skilled guides know the rogue, klamath, cal-salmon, scott and owyhee rivers inside and out. our number one goal is to provide you with the safest and most enjoyable river rafting adventure. you can find us in person at several locations: ashland, medford and gold hill, oregon. gold hill is a tiny town on the rogue river. ashland and medford are both located near several must-see sights: crater lake national park; jacksonville - with more than 100 historic buildings and landmarks; and ashland, home of the oregon shakespeare festival. all of these attractions are located a short drive from the southern oregon - northern california border. if you are interested in taking a wilderness vacation or a whitewater rafting trip and in seeing eagle, elk and bears in scenic landscapes, we are here to guide you. we custom tailor special outdoor events for your family, school or church group, children and seniors, corporate team, including physically challenged individuals. we have tahiti raft rentals, inflatable kayaks, paddles, life jackets and other equipment. explore the rogue klamath river adventures site and then contact us when you're ready to plan your next exciting white water rafting adventure or steelhead fly fishing trip in oregon! 1-800-231-0769 or e-mail us: info@rogueklamath.com please note: all rogue klamath river adventures trips are conducted with the permission, approvals, required permits and licenses, and within the established guidelines of: the oregon marine board; the united states department of interior; the bureau of land management - medford and vale district offices, and the klamath falls resource area; the u.s. forest service - rogue and  klamath national forests. equal opportunity recreation service provider all trips operated on a non-discriminatory basis copyright © 2002 rogue klamath river adventures p.o. box 4531 medford, or  97501 designed and hosted by: paige webber design