zambezi river rafting whitewater home | victoria falls | other extremes | combo trips | rafting photos zambezi whitewater with safari par excellence acclaimed as the wildest one-day whitewater run in the world, the zambezi river is also recognized by rafting and kayaking enthusiasts as one of the top ten paddling rivers on the planet! if you don't immediately associate the terms "stairway to heaven" and "oblivion" with adventure then you haven't experienced zambezi whitewater! the batoka rapids white water rafting on the zambezi river in victoria falls has been classified by the british canoe union as grade 5 - "extremely difficult, long and violent rapids, steep gradients, big drops and pressure areas". this is a high volume, pool-drop river with little exposed rock either in the rapids or in the pools below the rapids.  pick up a rapid-by-rapid account through the batoka gorge.... the batoka rapids below victoria falls were run in a raft for the first time in march 1981 safpar was one of the first commercial rafting operations in the early 90's and has established itself as the leading whitewater outfit in zambia: first in safety, gear, river guides and back-up. the company also pioneered river-boarding on the zambezi and is recognized as the top kayaking outfit on the zambian shoreline at victoria falls. the zambezi waterfront located 4km upstream of the falls is the official base from which we conduct our rafting, kayaking and riverboarding operations. find out more about our whitewater rafting options - we offer half and full day trips plus multi-day expeditions and a range of adventure combinations. safpar operates year round.  river conditions are determined by seasonally predictable fluctuations in water levels.  low water season generally runs from august to january each year - this is when the zambezi is at its very wildest.  we're in high water from about february to july with a short "closed season" around april/may depending on the season's rains.  the river report is an update on current rafting conditions in victoria falls. ... more on the zambezi... the zambezi rapids: a review of each rapid through the batoka gorge plus guidelines on rapid classifications the river report: some background on seasonal fluctuations plus the latest news on local conditions the rafting options: full details and modus operandi on the half and full day trips plus the multi-day expeditions and the adventure combos....... river boarding: pioneered by safpar with jon imhoof in 1996, the sport involves "surfing" the rapids on body boards accompanied by a qualified river guide. [riverboarding fact file] kayaking: half and full day tandem trips through the batoka gorge in topolino duo kayaks [kayaking fact file] rafting photos: a selection of river shots, spills and other action on the zambezi - compiled into 7 galleries of pictures - all images may be freely distributed! online bookings: if you're keen on a one day trip you can "pitch and paddle" or book in advance.  for multi-day expeditions and canoe trails, advance bookings are essential. friends of safpar: some of our friends from around the web.... msnbc: an account by richard bangs from expedia.com ...more on victoria falls... the zambezi waterfront: safpar's main base opposite siloka island just 4 km upstream from victoria falls.  offers a full range of accommodations and amenities including a campsite, a tented "adventure village" and comfortable chalets. the vic falls alternatives: a full menu of tame and extreme activities from bungee, kayaking, riverboarding, jetboating, canoeing, abseiling, horse and elephant trails, game drives, aerial options, fishing trips, safaris and essential tours in victoria falls and livingstone flights to victoria falls: a guide to obtaining cheap airfares to africa. includes maps and information on zimbabwe, zambia, botswana, namibia and south africa plus travel tips, hints and an online trip planner. [ batoka rapids ] [ whitewater options ] [ kayaking ] [ river boarding ] [ zambezi river report ] [ safpar's friends around the web ] international south africa harare victoria falls zambia telephone: +44 1548 830059 fax: +44 1548 831352 e-mail: safaris@safpar.com tel: +27 11 781 3581 fax: +27 11 886 1815 email: res@safariparx.com tel: +263 4 700911/2 fax: +263 4 722872 e-mail: speres@mweb.co.zw tel: +263 13 4424, 2190, 2054 fax: +263 4 722872 e-mail: res@safpar.co.zw tel: +260 332 0606/7/8 fax: +260 332 0609 e-mail: safpar@zamnet.zm © safari par excellence - gsa, 2001