california whitewater rafting with zephyr whitewater on the kings, tuolumne, merced, stanislaus, and american rivers. our experience: about zephyr family trips advanced trips special trips river schools our rivers: tuolumne river kings river merced river american river trip information: schedule/prices what's new guides gallery faq cuisine boats group discounts policies partnerships river conditions trip details 2002 trip dates contact us: free color catalog reservations site map fun stuff: kids guide to the kings river employment opportunities the best of california whitewater rafting is what you will find at zephyr whitewater expeditions.  we are one of california’s original and most experienced whitewater rafting outfitters. we offer exceptional california whitewater trips on the kings, tuolumne, merced, and american rivers, all near yosemite, lake tahoe, and kings canyon/sequoia national parks. our staff of highly trained professional whitewater river guides, both men and women, are the best in the business. our trips range from 1/2 day to five days in length, and all meals and camping are included. our california whitewater trips are great for families, for the first-timer rafter, and for the advanced thrill seeker. we hope that in browsing through our website, you will get to know us a little bit better. better still, give us a call, and then join us for a very special california whitewater rafting adventure. new for 2002:  zephyr has expanded, and we now have many more tuolumne river trip start dates available, including fridays, saturdays, and sundays.  click here for a list of all 2002 tuolumne trip starting dates,,,get the date that your group needs! also, we now have trips every day on the merced river, with 2 convenient meeting locations -   save valuable driving time before and after your trip. book now for 2002 prime weekend dates are starting to fill, so reserve your space early for this coming season.  just call us at 1-800-431-3636. free 16 page color catalogue upon request. kings river specials 2002 raft weekends prior to may 25 and pay weekday rates!  raft weekdays prior to may 25 and take 10% off normal rates. also, 1/2 day trips before may18 are selling for $60.00 per person. whitewater school 2002 want to become a river guide?  this is the place to start. march 24-30, and april 13-19. join our mailing list and receive our new catalogue in january of each year.  we also have group organizer packets making it very easy to you to organizer your own group of co-workers, church members, scouts, or just plain old friends.  check out our very generous group discounts. yosemite whitewater enhance your trip to yosemite with a day of whitewater rafting on the merced river...only minutes from yosemite park!  zephyr exclusive:  guaranteed private campground with tent cabins/tent camping before and/or after your river trip...only for zephyr clients, and only 45 minutes from yosemite!!  trips leave daily, and if you call today, you can probably raft tomorrow (april thru july, that is!) mothers day special take your active mom rafting on mothers day weekend (may 11-12) and receive a 10% discount over and above our normal discounts for everyone in your group.  good for kings and merced trips...great food, great camping, great fun. "zephyr did it again!! its now been 7 years that i've been going to the kings river for my annual trip, and once again my group was provided with outstanding service. zephyr is pure quality! between your first rate qualified guides, the most delicious food, the security of knowing safety is your #1 concern and the guarantee of such great fun…zephyr is simply unbeatable". gaye daniels, kings river, june 2000 p.o. box 510 columbia, ca 95310 e-mail: info@zrafting.com 209-532-6249 1-800-431-3636 toll free in california