guided fishing trips for smallmouth bass in west virginia's new river gorge home     contact us     meet songer     book it now     e-postcards     free wallpaper our trips new river gauley river family whitewater hi-adventure map and directions contact us adventure packs rock climbing mountain biking horseback riding lodging packages fishing packages food service map and directions contact us general info general info reservations songer store cancellations liability waivers gift certificates map and directions guest book weather our partners special savings free trip drawing boatload bonus gift certificates group discounts monthly special cyber special map and directions contact us subscribe to"thrills ahead"songer's e-newsletter enter your email address: send this page to a friend!(click here!) bass fishing packages west virginia's new river offers smallmouth bass fishing at it's finest. wv's new river has been home to more trophy size bass than any other stream in west virginia, the new river is an experience not to be missed. smallmouth bass offer one of the greatest fishing experiences, and are considered to be, pound for pound, one of the strongest fish. songer whitewater has recently teamed with some of the areas finest fly fishing guides and instructors. the streams which feed the new river team with trout of all kinds; brown trout, rainbow trout and native species as well. for more information on our trout fishing, send us an e-mail. 1-day trip saturday-sunday $175.00 monday-friday $150.00 reserve now | request a brochure 2-day trip saturday-sunday $350.00 monday-friday $300.00 reserve now | request a brochure choose your section fly fishing classes if you have ever wanted to learn the art of fly fishing, then take our informative fly fishing class. our guides take the mystery out of fly fishing and make it a fun, enjoyable experience that anyone can learn. we give you insight into fly fishing tackle, fly presentation, fly selection, water reading skills and have you casting in just a few hours. choose either a half or full day of fly fishing instruction. half day fly fishing class our 3 1/2 hour class gives you a basic introduction to the art of flyfishing. you will learn about tackle, flies, knot tying and casting. each angler will receive literature on the topics covered in class. all tackle and equipment is provided. half day $59 per person reserve now | request a brochure full day fly fishing class our 8 hour class gives you the same introduction as our half day class and allows you to spend the afternoon practicing your newly acquired skills alongside our knowledgeable instructors. each angler will receive literature on the topics covered in class. all tackle, and equipment, including a gourmet lunch and drinks, are provided. full day $99 per person some useful links: field & stream - find useful information about smallmouth bass from a leading authority on fishing, field & steam. wv dept. of natural resources - information on purchasing a west virginia fishing license. services performed for you by independent contractors are solely at your risk and subject to the terms, schedules, and conditions made by you, or for you, on your behalf, with the contractor furnishing the service. choose your section: section 1: on the meadow creek to prince section, top water fishing seems to produce the most action. this 14- mile section of river is ideal for a two-day trip. section 2: the prince to stonecliff section is 12 miles in length and can be fished in one day. top water action is best here, but some of the shoals are larger and require deep-water casts to produce the big action. section 3: the stonecliff to cunard section is 6 miles in length. this area is a combination of big boulders, calm pools, and medium size rapids. it is a good one-day fishing trip for all skill levels. section 4: the cunard to fayette station section is 9 miles in length. this part of the river increases in character and strength. starting with top water action and progressing to deep water casting quickly. the big rapids require more skill to tempt the fish into taking the bait. prior river fishing experience is recommended for this trip. the stonecliff to fayette station section is a great way to enjoy a two-day trip that combines fishing with big water rafting. call us today to discuss which of these fine trips suit you. contact us | book it now | meet songer new river | gauley river | family whitewater | hi-adventure lodging packages | fishing packages | family packages | food service general info | reservations | songer store | cancellations | liability waivers gift certificates | map & directions | guest book | weather our partners | boatload bonus | group discounts monthly specials | cyber special click here for homepage songer whitewater po box 300 fayetteville, wv 25840 1-800-356-7238 raft@songerwhitewater.com © 2000 songer whitewater. site by citynet