wolf river angler - usa lodging and fishing guides directory usa lodging guide - fishing guides directory - trout fishing - fly fishing - saltwater fishing - bass fishing - deep sea fishing wolf river angler your online resource for usa lodging and fishing guides information! join this bass fishing guides directory absolutely free! wolf river angler - your one stop usa lodging and fishing guides directory fishing guides trout fishing bass fishing saltwater fishing deep sea fishing fly fishing charter boats fishing guide links fishing news about wolf river angler advertise with us for free contact us wolf river angler is an online usa lodging and fishing guides directory providing booking information for your next fishing trip. this service provided to you as a customer absolutely free! we book your fishing vacations at no additional charge. this is a service provided for your convenience. we represent some of the best fishing resorts and guides in nation hand selected by our own staff. this is to provide you with top quality lodges and guides so you don't have to shop around for the best deal on the net. some of our specialties are fly fishing guides and saltwater fishing charters. we represent guides and resorts on the top rivers in the united states. the rivers are producers of world record trout! the guides listed hear can show you a trip of a lifetime. so join us today on our great outdoor adventures! this month's featured trout fishing resort charlie's rainbow trout resort - norfork, ar this resort is located on the banks of the north fork river in norfork arkansas producing world class trout. you will be amazed by this fishery and the surrounding beauty of the ozark mountains. species of trout include: brown, rainbow, brook and cutthroat trout. for booking information or to list your fishing guides in our free directory please e-mail us at wrafish@bellsouth.net or call us toll free at 1-877-877-3100 for reservations and information. home | trout fishing |  bass fishing  |  saltwater fishing  |  deep sea fishing  | fly fishing  |  charter boats  |  fishing guide links |  fishing news | advertise for free |  contact us wolf river angler - po box 1121 - collierville, tn - 38017 - 901-861-0932 © 2001, wolf river angler, inc. - a leading usa lodging and fishing guides directory featuring bookings for trout and saltwater fish vacations, tours, free listings and more.