south fork of the american river - whitewater rafting flow page news & rumors events kayak schools outfitters photos shopping logistics food lodging maps & views weather about levels bookstore conservation directory flow outlook links news team news archive river tour winter boating middle fork flow page news & rumors news team news archive background about archive donna link to us search site map top pages kayaking rafting coloma valley home the south fork of the american river is the one of the most popular whitewater rafting runs in the country, and for good reason! its action-packed class iii rapids are rollicking good fun for the entire family. south fork commercial outfitters offer a wide variety of river experiences. looking for wilderness camping? bed and breakfast? budget brown bag lunch? fine wines and gourmet meals? half day or two-day overnight? bus from the bay area, south lake tahoe, or even los angeles? prices vary a lot depending on the amenities, so shop until you find what best suits your group. what you can expect from any outfitter is to provide experienced guides and all the necessary equipment, including rafts, paddles, and life jackets. you'll need to bring sunscreen, rugged "wettable" clothes, old tennis shoes, a hat that can be tied to your head, and a gung-ho attitude. early in the season (through may and sometimes early june) you will need a wetsuit, which you can rent either from your outfitter or from the river store. the south fork directory offers several resources, including a list of outfitters licensed to operate on the south fork, and the photographers who can capture your adventure on film or video. the coloma valley visitors page offers links to local food and lodging, and ideas for other things to do while you're in the area. california outdoors, an industry association for california's rafting outfitters, has a list of outfitters licensed on the south fork and a few tips for choosing who's best for you. private rafters might want to check out the kayaking page, which has links to more resources for those paddling their own boats. don't see what you're looking for? look in the site map or try searching the south fork and coloma valley web sites. if you still don't find what you need, drop us a line at webmaster@coloma.com and we'll put it on the to-do list. last update 8/1/01 by webmaster@coloma.com photographs by donna mcmaster except as noted otherwise. copyright ©1995-2001 coloma communications. all rights reserved.