california whitewater rafting with whitewater voyages f r e e ! catalog group kit screen saver postcards 1-800-400-raft our rivers camps & schools special trips trip planning & reservations our catalog online online offerings whitewater reference contact us company info site map & search whitewater voyages is california's largest, most experienced, most popular whitewater rafting outfitter. our caring, professional river guides are truly dedicated to making each and every rafting trip the finest possible. our california rivers: we were the first to run rafting trips on many of the fine california rivers outlined here, and for many, many years have guided more people down california's rivers than any other rafting outfitter. we offer an incredible selection of california whitewater rivers; state-of-the-art rafting equipment; abundant, healthy, delicious camp cuisine served with panache; smooth shuttles and caring, skilled, intelligent guides at the top of their profession. we provide a supportive atmosphere where you--your needs and enjoyment--are truly cared for! let's go rafting - our latest news... top now more than ever, we all need the uplift and renewal and fun of a whitewater voyages river trip! come with us out into nature. relax on a beautiful california river. delight in pure, healthy adventure and excitement. reconnect with your inner well spring of life-affirming strength and calm and joy! especially with the addition of the fabulous kings river, whitewater voyages now more than ever provides the finest trips possible on the widest selection of california's best rivers. truly, wherever you live in the golden state, we run wonderful rivers nearby. we want you to rest assured that the natural, joyous, healing retreat of whitewater voyages river trips will always be here for you--but remember: book early to get the dates you want. new--view our catalog online! use our online order form to request your copy by mail or view it online now by clicking here. you can also order your free copy by calling us at 800-400-raft. river signals released! this small book by william mcginnis and the whitewater voyages staff presents a comprehensive language of hand and whistle signals which can be useful in all sorts of situations, including coordinating groups of boats, coping with emergencies, and making those all-important emotional connections—both on the river and at cocktail parties! intuitive and easy to remember, these signals enhance cooperation and good will within and between boating groups, and make river journeys safer, smoother and more fun. call us to order a copy. the publication of river signals, which, like bill's other books, will be sold iin bookstores and outdoor shops worldwide, is the latest in an ongoing series of contributions by whitewater voyages to the growth and development of the ever-evolving sport of whitewater rafting. we are proud of whitewater voyages' leadership role in the world of river rafting. a few examples, in case you were not aware: we pioneered guided trips on many of california's finest rivers. as a whitewater voyages guide in the early '80's, jim cassady invented the modern self-bailing raft. and bill's books whitewater rafting, the guides guide, and the class v briefing have helped foster not only safer but also warmer, more caring guiding on rivers throughout the world. new for 2002: new group discount: groups of 12 or more get 15% off! 2-day/1-night trips on the kings: on the kings, the latest wonderful addition to our family of rivers, we will provide 1-day trips; 1-night/1-day trips; and 2-day/1-night trips, but not 2-day/2-night trips. this change away from 2-day/2-night trips allows us to hold our prices down by using our facilities more efficiently. happily, our 2-day/1-night kings trips will meet at 11 a.m., allowing ample time to drive up that morning, and will include: four fabulous meals. all the pleasures of our idyllic river-beach camp. and the full 2-day experience of the great natural whitewater roller coaster ride that is the kings!! for more details on our kings trips, click here. protect the kings & lower kern: your support is needed to help get these rivers included in senator barbara boxer's soon-to-be-introduced california wild heritage bill which could designate these wonderful runs wild & scenic, protecting them forever from dams. click here for more information. myprimetime.com interview with bill mcginnis as a part of their ongoing review of those who have "have lived and worked the individual adventure," myprimetime.com recently interviewed bill mcginnis, owner and founder of whitewater voyages about his philosophies of guiding, working, and living. read the article here. send a postcard: create an online postcard for a friend, featuring some of our exciting rafting pictures. it's simple, easy, and fun. visit our postcard page. an unforgettable gift! whitewater voyages gift certificates are truly what dreams are made of! use the secure online order form, e-mail us, or call us at 1-800-400-7238! sign our guestbook: visit our guestbook. you can sign in and tell others about your rafting trip, or read what others have said. repeat rafter program! beginning with trips taken as far back as 1998, every five full days you raft with us earns a $100 credit good towards your next whitewater voyages trip! many people have already earned their credit and taken advantage of this program. you can too! get the details! view brochure online! get adobe acrobat here! subscribe to voyagesby entering your email: more about ouremail programs tell a friend about our web site! your e-mail: your friend's e-mail: your message: employee guidehouse (password required) ©2002 whitewater voyages. 1-800-400-raft. all rights reserved. last modified 1/29/2002