rogue river fishing salmon & steelhead fishingcall 800 336 1647e-mail 2001 guided fishing trip prices & packages rogue wilderness has specialized in fishing on the rogue river since the early 1970s. our staff of seasoned veterans are experts in a variety of fishing techniques: fly fishing, spin casting, bait bouncing, and pulling plugs. all fishing rods and tackle as well as bait and flies are furnished by the guides. in order to provide the kind of individual instruction we prefer, there is one guide assigned for each two fishermen. our mckenzie-style drift boats are truly the “rolls royce” of river craft. passengers relax in the luxury of comfortable bucket-type seats with back rests. the guide sits behind where he can give instruction and watch the rod tips for the tell-tale bite. fall chinook and coho salmon in recent years, the number of fall run chinook and coho salmon has increased dramatically, providing an excellent fishery from late august through mid-november. spring chinookthere is probably no better fighting or eating fish than the spring chinook salmon. "springers" return from the ocean to the river from mid-april until the end of july. summer run steelhead the summer-run steelhead begin to arrive in july on the rogue and fishing remains productive through the fall. these beautiful, hard fighting fish are taken on flies and lures. in late august, the famous rogue ”half-pounders” begin their returns from the ocean. these 14 to 20-inch fish are great fun on light fly rods and spinning equipment. winter-run steelheadthe large winter steelhead enter southern oregon rivers in january, and fishing continues until april. this is an excellent fishing opportunity for the serious fisherman. there are fewer boats, fewer people, and plenty of fish. rogue river fish runs & rogue wilderness fishing schedule janfebmaraprmayjunjulaugsepoctnovdec wntr steelheadxxx xxx xxx sprg chinook ooooooooo sumr steelheadxxxxxxxxx fall chinookooooooooo coho salmonxxxxxx day tripsoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo wild sectionxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx agness areaoooooo jet boat xxxxxxxxxxxx xxx and ooo represent the months of the fish runs/fishing trips(eg. jul & dec. are not a good times for fishing the rogue river) free color brochure return to rwi home page