steelhead fishing 1998 gold river steelhead fishing trip 1998 gold river steelhead fishing trip by dave kilhefner fishing partners: nick amato, shawn, peter, matt intro: one of the advantages of the internet is the access to rough draft material. the following 3,500 words represents a diary of my trip to the gold river this year. it’s too long for publication. i’d have to chop (edit) it down to about 1,500 words. hopefully, this long version will give anglers wanting to journey to the gold some insight into what it takes to make a trip like this work. if you have any questions, please feel free to e-mail me. 04/02/98 (thurs) left portland, oregon for gold river with nick amato about 8pm. our destination was the ferry terminal at tsawwasson. we arrived about 2:30am. i managed to get some sleep this year by covering up with a sleeping bag. keeping warm helps you get some sleep in the car. this is important on an all night drive. one surprise occurred when the ferry attendant charged me the higher over 7 feet tall rate even though i laid my mountain bike down low on my canopy rack and secured it with bungee cords. apparently, the people who run the ferry are real sensitive to this. 04/03/98 (fri) high clouds and low, clear water. put in at the #3 bridge above town and planned to float in the inflatable kayak to just above the rambo hole, then pack out. ran over a nice steelhead in the tail end of the first pool—should have put a bobber and jig through this spot. because of the low water, it was necessary to drag the boat over the shallow water areas. this was generally a good idea, as floating into the head of the pool below generally spooked the fish! i had two rods. a drift rig on rod #1 and a bobber and jig on rod #2. it should be noted i’m a beginner at the bobber jig technique at this point. i’m making a serious effort at learning the in’s and out’s of this technique because nick really cleans up using this method. didn’t hook any fish until hitting the pool where dave kaffke got his first steelhead on the gold river 10 years ago. it was a nice bright hen about 11lbs. it took a lt pink and white 1/8oz beau mac jig fished about 4’ under a bobber. floated all the way down to the top of the rambo hole but, looking back, did not hit some really good (but small) pockets. i bagged the kayak and packed it up the steep hill. next time, i’ll bring a rope and drag it up the hill! note: it’s about a two mile bike ride from here the put in on the muchalat river. that night, we had a few beers back at the room and the lack of sleep took it’s toll. i barely made it past dinner and crashed in shawn and peter’s room. they woke me up and i went looking for nick. after about 10 minutes, i decided to camp out. it was a nice night and it was easy to set up a quick camp at the lions campground about a mile down the road. plus, i wanted to try out my new therma-rest camping mattress. i slept like a baby until the crows woke me up about 6am the next morning. 04/04/98 (sat) high clouds and low, clear water. strange, but it’s warmer first thing in the morning an gets colder as the day (and light, but cold wind) progresses. the plan this day was to float the lower river from the lake pool to the garbage pit. i stashed the bike at the garbage pit and hustled back to the lake pool. this is about a 2 mile bike ride and a little bit of a climb is involved. dragging the inflatable kayak down the trail to the lake pool is easy. i tried to paddle up to the falls hole but the current was too fast. while i was trying to paddle against the current, two fishermen appeared and hooked a nice chrome steelhead on the first cast. then, the action was over. i floated downstream and ran into tony, brian and dave on clark’s run. they worked their way up from riley’s without success. i continued to float down to the garbage pit, stopping along the way to fish likely looking spots. i didn’t hook any fish, but looking back on it now, i simply was not fishing the jig correctly. the jig was the hot lure in this low water. also, i passed up water that had good jig potential. something to note: there’s quite a bit of deep pools in this area. the runs are about 12 feet deep. it would take a heavier gear to fish these pools effectively. perhaps a heavy magnum slinky drift fishing outfit or a slip float and a jig. shawn was fishing with nick on the upper river today when he twisted his knee walking over the rocks. i spotted him along the road, gave him my truck and walked down to the muchalat pool to fish with nick. he’d just taken a fish from the pool when i arrived. we worked our way down below the rambo hole. nick hooked one on a jig at the big bend below the rambo hole. we ended up working our way to the upper canyon pool and then busting brush to the outskirts of the indian village just before dark. peter and shawn picked us up along the road above the rambo hole just as it was getting dark. i count this as my hardest fishing day without ever getting a bite! we ran into matt, locke and marilynn at the ridge pub that night. they informed us they’d had a great day on the river, hooking 10 steelhead. matt had taken his largest fish ever, estimated at 31 pounds using the length/girth formula. i don’t remember the girth he quoted, but the length was 43. a huge buck! it was taken pulling plugs at the garbage pit. they said they floated from the campground to the pumphouse and had seen lots of fresh steelhead. they were not eager to run the falls again. 04/05/98 (sun) after last night, i made up my mind to drag my inflatable kayak down to the falls hole early in the morning and float to the garbage pit. i had a hat trick on casts 3, 4 and 5 of the day, hooking 3 chrome bright steelhead in a row running from 9lbs to 12lbs. the action stopped so i took about 10 minutes to enjoy the morning, have a snicker’s bar and rest the hole. i hooked one more steelhead before jumping into the inflatable kayak and floating downstream. i didn’t get any action from here to the garbage pit. however, i ran into nick, shawn and peter at riley’s. peter had just caught one small chrome bright steelhead when i arrived. one thing to note: later in the week, nick and i found some really good looking water downstream from the garbage pit hole. it would take very little time or effort to float through this section. from now on, i’m floating through to the pumphouse! that afternoon, we all took a little time away from steelhead fishing and made the 45 minute drive to cougar creek campground to pluck oysters off the rocks. the rare and delicious nesook bay oyster is not to be missed. within about 20 minutes, we had more oysters than we could eat (or shuck as it turned out. shawn and nick cut their hands pretty bad in the attempt!). 04/06/98 (mon) high clouds, some light showers and low clear water. nick and i scheduled a hell hike on the upper river. we walked down the old road from the rambo hole, then took an old trail (elk trail?) straight down the hill to the upper canyon pool. we saw a couple bright fish in the tailout and tried to get them to take a marabou jig. we just managed to spook them. we scrambled over large rocks downstream to the airport hole. nick caught two on a small float, 6’ leader and egg imitations. the steelhead were holding on an edge out of the main current close to the far shore. i saw a nice buck but it moved out of sight after repeated casts. we scrambled back upstream and were really glad to see the big bend below the rambo hole. that meant we could stop scrambling and start walking for a change. nick hooked one on a pink jig at the top of the bucket. we continued fishing our way upstream and nick got another one on an inside edge two holes below the hike out hole as i was re-rigging my gear after hanging up. we worked our way upstream and nick graciously offered me pole position on the hole. the water looked great. after a couple of good but fruitless casts through the upper end, nick finally limbered up his casting arm and fired his pink jig into the open mouth of a fat, chrome 13lb hen on the first cast. he apologized upon hooking the steelhead. hey, when it’s your day, it’s your day. no need for apologies! i was going to school today. one pattern that held true: nick was concentrating his approach on the slower edges and he was not attempting to fish right on the bottom. his depth was about halfway between the surface and the bottom, sometimes a little deeper. i’ve been trained since my steelhead fishing birth to scrape the bottom—this is not the way to fish the jig! nick was losing far less gear and fishing more efficiently than me, and got five steelhead. like charlie brown on halloween, all i ever got was a rock. we got hold of matt that night. he stopped by the room for a couple beers and we set up a float from the bridge above town to the campground. 04/07/98 (tues) first thing in the morning, matt called to inform us he’d lost his keys. no big deal, just more time to drink more coffee. we started the float about an hour late but no one got into the water ahead of us. the first few holes didn’t produce but it was good to see where an experienced guide fishes. it was a slow start to a day that would turn into a clinic on jig fishing by nick amato. the first fish nick hooked was in about 3 feet of water in a slow, slick surfaced tailout. as we worked our way down river, i noticed several pools had very deep holding areas and pockets. i’m not really sure how to fish these areas effectively. matt was using a canadian style float fishing outfit and seemed to be covering the water quite well. we were floating along above the peppercorn bridge when nick fired into an unlikely looking pocket and pulled out another steelhead. the amazing thing about this was there was only 1’ of leader between the jig and the float. nick refers to these fish as bonus fish. they’re fish you wouldn’t even normally target, so you wouldn’t have a chance at catching them. he (nick) shortens his leader from 12 to 18 and quickly fires his bobber and pink jig into anything that looks like it could hold a fish as we floated from one major holding pool to the next. when steelhead are moving from one major pool to another, they’ll hold where they can. nick can typically rack up 2 to 5 bonus fish in one day. we hooked a couple more bonus fish before we reached the golf course pool. we worked our way through this large pool without success. as we neared the tailout, nick asked matt if he thought there was fish in the deep tailout area. matt said there were, but the chances of catching any were slim and none. the steelhead were holding in one big school and wouldn’t bite. bobber down! nick set the hook on the first of 5 fish that would take the marabou jig fished with an 11’ leader that afternoon. i even caught a couple, but only after we kicked nick out of the boat so he could fight his fish and i could get a clear cast at the fish zone. just when we thought it was safe to have an opinion again, nick caught another nice steelhead in an unlikely spot. at the spawner hole at the big bend. as nick was reeling in his fish, he explained that yes, this was a spawner hole but fresh(er) steelhead would stage above the spawners, getting ready to move upstream. it’s always more convincing to be lectured by a guy who’s fighting a steelhead and talking at the same time. 04/08/98 (wed) shawn and i went fishing today. the plan was to do a mini float from the golf course tailout to the campground. we got started about 8:30am. we dropped the bike at the campground then drove to the gold river course to pump up the kayaks. this took about 10 minutes. it’s a short drag to the river, then we paddled upstream a little before angling across the river. it’s best the park the kayak’s below the big rock instead of above it. we climbed to the top of the big rock, pulled our jigs about 11 feet below the floats and started casting. i had a take down on my first cast. it was a nice buck of about 12-14lbs showing some color. shawn was having some trouble with his gear (specifically, coils in his line). after a while, i couldn’t stand it anymore (the complaining, that is) and traded fishing poles with shawn. on my second or third cast using shawn’s pole, i got a strike and set the hook into a nice 15lb buck. like the first steelhead, it was showing a little color. however, it was a stubborn fighter and took about 15 minutes to land. we got a little bored with this spot + matt was coming down the river with his dude. we jumped into the raft and paddled up to matt to see what was going on. nothing, it turned out. matt was guiding a fly fisherman today and the steelhead were not into the deep wet fly swing today. we floated down to the big bend to try for some of those bright steelhead that stage above the spawners, but we needeed long cast bubble floats to reach the current and get a good drift. we didn’t have any so down the river we floated. it was a beautiful day and we ended up a the campground before long. shawn went to fish the lower holes while i went to get the truck and take down the inflatable kayaks (they’re mine, i like to do it). when i got back, shawn had a fishing story to tell! apparently, while i was riding back to the truck, shawn walked down to the pool and hooked a nice bright steelhead on his first cast. the knot came undone right next to the bank and both the fish and the jig got away. shawn decided to leave his vest with the kayaks so back he went to get another jig. he returned with a fresh jig and repeated the process, hooking another steelhead on the first cast. according to shawn, it was a huge chrome steelhead which fought a stubborn 20 minute battle before surrendering. i was up at the campground rolling up the kayaks and could not hear shawn yelling over the sound of the river. he released the fish like a good guy, but no one but shawn saw just how big it really was and he wasn’t carrying a camera. oh well. our next stop was the garbage pit hole. shawn got his 3rd and final fish of the day, a nice bright 8lb steelhead. we made a beer run then went looking for nick and peter. we found them just as they’d hiked out of the upper canyon. they had about a 2 mile walk back to their truck, so the were really glad to see us and our ice cold kokanee. that night we talked about rafting the upper river. we thought it was possible to do as we’d seen a whitewater canoe club earlier in the week do it. plus, nick and i hiked to the airport hole and back and it appeared the opposite side of the river offered good portage opportunities if the water looked too rough. running the river is the most efficient way to cover more water and catch more fish! 04/09/98 (thurs) broken clouds, clear and kind of cold. very low water. i woke up and just wasn’t into running the upper river. the older of my two inflatable kayaks was in need of some tlc and it wasn’t going to get it on the upper river. nick and i decided to hit the falls hole. we hiked down the steep trail (posted speed limit 35 kph) about 9am and it appeared we were the first one’s there. we were right. on my second cast i hooked and landed about a 10lb chrome steelhead on a jig. we pounded the spot for another hour without results. we hiked out and ran into shawn and peter, who were fished out and taking it easy. i decided to drive home that afternoon and shawn said he was ready to go too. nick and i decided to hit one more spot. we fished the nice flat, riffle below the garbage pit. it looked great, but didn’t produce. however, i made a mental note to float to this spot instead of stopping at the garbage pit. if fish are moving through, they’ll hold here! shawn and i hit the road about 2pm. we stopped and fished campbell lake for about 30 minutes before the wind came up and we decided to bag it. just to let you know how difficult the fishing really was, we saw one of the local guides rowing around with his dudes in the bay near buttle lake. these guys had flown in from alabama to catch a steelhead. the fishing was so slow they chose trout fishing in the lake over steelhead fishing on the gold river! shawn and i managed to catch the 8pm ferry and were on the mainland by 10pm. we arrived in portland at 4am friday morning. another fun and successful trip to the gold river. nick and matt went fishing in the afternoon. they hiked into the canyon below the campground. matt used his expert knowledge of the secret fish holding areas to hook and land 7 steelhead on bobbers and jigs. nick really turned him on to fishing with this technique! for what it’s worth, nick showed matt this technique last year. he bought a couple spinning rods but never got the technique to work for him due to lack of time. nick got him dialed in and he started hooking good numbers of steelhead right away. 04/11/98 (fri) per nick amato and peter (they stayed an extra day). nice weather and very low water. fishing difficult. nick and peter walked into the canyon above the falls. i don’t know the name of the pool, but it has a 100’ + impassable rock face right in the middle of it. this rock face makes hiking and fishing this section of the river almost impossible. peter managed to hook and land a 22 pound buck. it was a little dark. they captured the fight on video camera! low water tackle that worked: rods, reels, lines: 8.5’ - 9.5’ spinning rod, shimano 2000 series spin reels, 10lb stren magna thin or 8lb maxima ultra green line. bobber and jigs: 1/8oz beau mac marabou steelhead jigs in hot pink and light pink and white fished under a thill turbo master float. for those rare long cast situations, substitute a large plastic bubble. spinners: #3 spinners in brass, nickel and silver plate rigged like drift gear with 24 of 8lb leader, swivel and pre-made hollow core pencil lead sinkers pinched on a loop of mono. these sinkers release when snagged, which is often on the gold river. drift gear: #2 black hook, 24 8lb leader, orange or pink jensen egg, white yarn and #7 cheapo snap swivel. ½ and 1 ½ pre made lead sinkers (described above). sometimes, you just gotta have some drift gear. the orange and white color combo is the favorite producer on the gold river. clothing: mts mid-weight long underwear, up to three layers of mts long sleeve shirts, polortec 200 vest, fleece baklava, baseball cap, goofy goggles, 3mm(ish) neoprene waders, lightweight columbia sportswear rubber raincoat. why describe clothing? hey, if it keeps you dry, comfortable and on the river, it’s worth talking about. food: pre-made ham sandwiches (on bagels, they keep better) and snickers bars kept the hunger pangs at bay when we didn’t feel like cooking, which was almost every day. the end receive a free e-mail subscription to this magazine. enter your internet e-mail address: choose your destination! home page free magazine! add your link free picture of the week fishing pictures ask the expert book store win free stuff what's new? river levels tide charts staff our awards award winners win awards free magazine! advertise your site our sponsors great lodges past articles fishing wallpaper webrings articles top 10 books picture archives trout pictures salmon pictures readers pictures exotic pictures steelhead pictures sexy pictures fishing auction book store ask the expert heart defects home page archivesadvertise pic of the week ton's-o-links awards what's new?fishing pictures banner exchange [home page ]  [past articles] [fishing pictures] [ask the expert ] [book store ] [our awards] [picture of the moment ][win free stuff ] [what's new? ] [river levels ] [tide charts ] [staff ] [award winners ] [win awards ] [advertise your site ][squid] [great lodges ] [fishing wallpaper ] [picture archives ] [trout pictures ] [salmon pictures ] [readers pictures ][exotic pictures ] [steelhead pictures ] [sexy pictures ] [webrings ] [guest book ]  [top 10 books] [contact] [banner exchange] [cooking ] [search]