indian river adventures specializes in light tackle fishing serving titusville, cocoa, cocoa beach, merritt island and melbourne search indian river adventures sign our guest book book a trip types of charters light tackle flats fishing wade fishing fly & light tackle fishing no motor zone fishing offshore fishing camping / fishing trip deluxe camping trip eco-tours special discount offers book two days and save winter specials fishing / accommodation packages accommodations days inn cocoa beach best western oceanfront fishing report our weekly fishing report pictures taken on our fishing trips fishing links rippn-lip.com don ray internet studio descriptions of what you could catch equipment capt doug uses tj stallings's stoopid rig what is flats fishing? florida fishing records buy tackle online from eangler the fly fisherman fl-fishing.com back country fly fisherman international game fish association ladies let's go fishing eco-tour pictures general pictures dolphin manatees other links map and directions to docks fishing and environmental links mangrove links pepper trees wvbizmall environment links up-coming mangrove planting cca-fl mangrove planting 2001 & map past mangrove plantings mailing list join our mailing list! and register to win a free fishing trip since 6/1/2000 light tackle fishing indian river adventures is a central florida based guide service with a variety of guides, each specializing in a different area of light tackle fishing.  most of the guides have over thirty years experience fishing this area. so if you're looking for  red fish, gator trout, tarpon, king mackerel, cobia, dolphin, tuna, sailfish, marlin,  sharks... well you get the picture... we have a guide for you . light tackle flats fishing with capt. doug blanton fishing light tackle on the flats of the indian and banana rivers is an adventure that you will talk about for years to come.  on my trips i will show you how to catch  trout, redfish, tarpon and snook. if you have never fished with light tackle, don't worry. i cater to all fishing experience levels, from beginner to expert. with my 25+ years experience fishing this area i will do everything i can to insure you go home with great memories of an enjoyable fishing trip. for more information, click here or on my "light tackle flats fishing" link to the left. fly & light tackle fishing with capt. scott maccalla the spacecoast has a great variety of gamefish.  redfish, seatrout, tarpon, snook, tripletail, king mackerel, cobia, shark, largemouth bass, flounder, and barracuda, are just some examples of what you will catch with backcast charters.  the key is knowing when and where to look.  depending on the season, and depending on the bite, we will fish the areas that extend from palm coast in the north and as far south as sebastian inlet. these include the st. johns river, mosquito lagoon, the atlantic ocean outside of port canaveral, and the indian and banana rivers.  backcast charters offers fly fishing as a specialty, but is sure to satisfy the guiding needs of light tackle anglers as well. for more information click here or on the "fly &light tackle fishing" link on the  left. no motor zone fishing trips with craig redwine if you're looking for a pristine quiet area where the fishing pressure is low and you can get close to the fish such as redfish, speckled trout, snook, tarpon and black drum, than the no-motor zone is for you. come with me as i will pole you down the banana river in an 18 ft indian river canoe outfitted with sping creek's stabilizers for a steady ride. so sit back, relax and be ready for an adventure you'll not soon  forget. for more information click here or on the "no-motor zone" link on the  left. offshore fishing trips with capt bill bernhardt trolling live bait in the open atlantic off the shores of port canaveral is exciting fishing.  the angler is provided with the opportunity to watch fish actually stalk and attack the bait, usually with ferocity. time out charters specializes in trolling live bait on light tackle.  we have taken a large variety of species with this method of fishing: including king mackerel, cobia, dolphin, tuna, wahoo, tarpon, amberjacks, sailfish, marlin, and sharks to name a few.  the fish targeted on any particular day depends on the migration patterns of the various species.  trolling live bait is an enjoyable and exciting way to spend a day on the atlantic. for more information about time out charters, click here or on  the "offshore fishing trips" link on the left. camping / fishing trips with capt. doug blanton why just go camping when you can go fishing at the same time? indian river adventures is now booking fishing / camping trips in the indian and banana rivers. this trip will include 1 1/2 days of  fishing along with 1 night of island camping on one of the space coast's 59 islands. for more information click here or on the "camping trips" link on the  left. eco-tours with capt. doug blanton the indian river lagoon is more than another body of water, it is a large piece of florida's natural history. its waters are full of aquatic species such as the west indian manatees, bottle nose dolphins, numerous types of rays and an occasional alligator. for more information, click here or on my "eco-tours" link to the left. coast guard approved all of our guides are united states coast guard licensed captains and certified in first aid and cpr. for general information e-mail: info@indianriver.cc our mailing address: indian river adventures , p.o. box 160 sharpes, fl 32959-0160 e-mail us at: captdoug@indianriver.cc capt. doug blanton copyright © 2001 [indian river adventures]. all rights reserved. revised: 18 january, 2002 . member of the cocoa beach chamber of commerce and the tourism development council. webpages created by rick's cool webpages copyright 1996-2000 previous cast | random | poll |tackle | search | next cast iar powered by fishnation join today fish clix banner exchange