alaska salmon, halibut, trout affordable charter fishing guide affordable alaska fishing guide features professionally guided and fully equipped alaska fishing charters for king salmon, red, pink and silver salmon, rainbow trout, dolly varden, halibut and ling cod from a fishing lodge made up of private, fully equipped alaska style cabins located right on the kenai river near soldotna, alaska . affordable alaska fishing guide for discount alaska fishing! affordable alaska fishing guide features big discounts on: alaska fishing guides salmon fishing vacations halibut fishing charters remote fly-out fishing fly-fishing excursions trophy trout fishing drift boat fishing alaska fishing maps alaska fishing books the alaska fishing guide fish camp is one of the few fish camps or lodges in alaska that have frontage along the world class salmon and trophy trout glacier fed kenai river. you are provided with not only professionally guided fishing trips for alaska salmon, halibut and trout, but you also stay in large clean comfortable alaska style cabins with all modern conveniences. yes, you get to cook your own meals, but you eat when you want, what you want, and you do not have to choke down the gray meat and potatoes you pay $200 a day or more for at the other lodges on the kenai river. in addition to the kitchenette in your cabin we provide outdoor grills and picnic benches  where you can bbq some of your days catch and swap stories with the other fishermen at the end of the day. with our great package prices it does not get much better!! and you can still fish right off the riverbank when you want... alaska king salmon!! alaska fishing guide fishes for this prize alaska salmon in the kenai and kasilof rivers from may to the end of july using  powerboats and drift boats to get the best results for you. you can expect fish that go to 80lbs and more. pacific halibut!! capt. mark and his fv northern lights is “the man” when it comes to getting big halibut and ocean salmon. catches of 50-150 lb fish are common. we had the homer halibut derby winner in 1999 at over 365 lbs. too bad the angler did not buy a derby ticket for $7.50, $32000 went to a fish 100 lbs lighter. for great eating and some fantastic scenery on a great halibut charter boat, fv northern lights we highly recommend this saltwater fishing trip. silver salmon!! from late july until october this premier anglers dream fish dominates the action on the kenai peninsula. whether you are fly fishing, bait fishing or spin casting the alaska silver salmon will surely challenge your fishing expertise. our guide knows where to hook you up with these fighters!!! crazy reds or sockeye!! now here’s a fish that knows how to dance and the good news is you can get this fish right off our own riverbank. the sockeye is a real challenge for the fly fisherman as well as a spinning rod. in june, july, and august you can count on some hot action with this great eating fish. and best of all you can get them without going far from your cabin. rainbow trout and dolly varden!! the kenai produces some of the best rainbow  trout and dolly varden fishing around and our lead river fishing guide john has over 30 years experience catching them as well as several differently timed runs of steelhead in the numerous local fishing streams. we have some great fly-out trips for these fish as well as all species of salmon and grayling and char. don’t forget to ask about these special alaska fishing vacation side trips. click here or click here for printable info or e mail the affordable fishing guide or call toll free: 1-800-770-3701 click these links below for more info fishing  vacations fishing maps faqs click here [home] [fishing vacations] [fishing maps] [faqs] [links] [contact] link to affordable alaska fishing guide 1af aft afl hfa afm