planning your alaska fishing trip to kenai river sportfishing lodge it's your turn to fish the kenai at kenai river sportfishing lodge every month of the season offers superb fishing opportunities. from the early run kings in may to the late season trophy rainbows in september, you'll always find fishing excitement here on the kenai. during may, june, and july we feature fishing for king and sockeye salmon; during august and september we feature fishing for silver salmon. rainbow trout and dolly varden open june 11 and we fish for them through september. our return guests will attest, rainbows and dollies are especially hot in august and september. many of our guests choose to add an optional day of halibut fishing to their multi-day package. (halibut fishing is included in the 6 day/ 7 night and 7 day/ 8 night packages.) kenai river sportfishing lodge caters to all types of anglers. whatever you are after, and however you like to hook 'em up, we can give you that dream fishing trip. fishing in the emerald green waters of the kenai planning your kenai fishing adventure kenai river sportfishing lodge has packages of three to seven full days of fishing available. our most popular packages are described below. our experienced reservationists will be happy to help plan your trip and discuss ideas for your fishing vacation. non-fishing opportunities for those in your party who don't want to fish every day we offer a non-fishing discount. there may be an opportunity to join one of our guided rafting trips or to venture off on a self-guided hike along numerous local trails. please ask our reservations staff for details. and, for the ultimate non-fishing add-on package, ask about a stay at our secluded lakeside kenai backcountry lodge! alaskan wildflowers denali national park if you'd like to visit denali national park before or after your fishing lodge package, please contact us for recommendations. we are affiliated with three denali-area properties and would be happy to assist you with planning a memorable trip. you might also visit our denali websites at: www.denalilodge.com, www.denaliwildernesslodge.com, www.denali-cabins.com highlights at least 8 hours of guided fishing per day or until you limit out combine fishing for kings or silvers with fishing for rainbow trout and dolly varden all fishing gear provided excellent guest to guide ratio comfortable log lodge, cozy cabins, sauna friendly guides and lodge staff anchorage airport transfers beautiful mountainous setting sample all-inclusive fishing lodge package 6 days/7 nights salmon - trout - halibut - $$3,095 per person for those with the time to experience the best of alaska fishing, we recommend this package. you will have the opportunity to fish for the available species of salmon, plus rainbow trout and dolly varden. additionally, you will join a charter vessel for a day's trip into alaska's productive marine waters in search of huge pacific halibut. this package includes full eight-hour days of fishing. 5 days/6 nights salmon -trout - $2,650 per person* this package has been our standard for years. we'll chase kings or silvers on the lower kenai, and float the upper kenai for rainbow trout and dolly varden, or possibly the prized sockeye salmon. no matter what season you choose, we'll maximize your fishing to give you the best fishing vacation we can. this package includes five full eight-hour days of fishing. 3 days/4 nights salmon - trout - $1,750 per person* if you are short on time but want to get in some world-class alaskan fishing, our shorter packages are perfect. many travelers find these packages to be a great addition to other vacation activities in alaska. enjoy the same amenities and fishing opportunities available in our longer packages. this package includes three full eight-hour days of fishing. *halibut fishing is included in the 6 day/ 7 night and 7 day/ 8 night packages, but can be added to any package (as an extension) for an additional cost. 82lb. king salmon wrestled from the kenai river home page | fish the kenai | trip planning | accommodations | reservations guests' comments | about our guides | faq's | order our brochure be sure to visit these other alaska wildland adventures sites! alaska wildland adventures is a proud member of the better business bureau kenai river sportfishing lodge • p.o. box 389 • girdwood, ak 99587-0389 (800)-478-4100 • direct (907) 783-2928 • fax: (907) 783-2130 info@alaska-wildland.com © 1998-2001 kenai river sportfishing lodge. all rights reserved trip.html last modified saturday, 17-nov-2001 16:36:18 est validated beykrsl