river rafting in washington state and oregon all river riders have two things in common: a love for whitewater river rafting and a desire to share it. the truth is we're excited about river rafting and want to enjoy it with as many people as possible. it's our job as river rafting professionals to make sure you enjoy more than just the river.our river rafting guides, the most experienced in washington, create a relaxed atmosphere with their personal touch & witty sense of humor.our gourmet lunch features now famous "river recipes", and our weekend catered bbq is fantastic! so come join us for river rafting...it's a blast! the best river rafting expeditions in washington state! mild river rafting to wild river rafting! highest quality rafts & safety equipment premium wet suits & booties your safety is our primary concern! what our customers say: thank you for a fabulous river rafting experience. our family will never forget our skagit bald eagle trip. your guides are so knowledgeable, friendly, and respoctful. definitely first class. we counted sixty two eagles that morning, two within a close enough range to look us straight in the eye! i want to especially thank you for your concern for the comfort and safety of our children. thanks to your thorough information we prepared for the elements, and aside from a couple quivering lips we were quite comfortable. i was initially concerned about bringing the kids along, but once we met up with your crew, we realized that river rider takes safety seriously. we had a great time, and we can't wait for our next adventure ! ~ the howard family, washington river rafting:   schedules & rivers    reservations & rates    training    photosrivers:   wenatchee   methow   nooksack   white salmon   skykomish   toutle   klickitat   suiattle   tieton   skagit b. eagle contact   copyright 1997-2001 by river riders, inc. all rights reserved. member of woga & american outdoors. river riders, inc. operates under "special use permit" by u.s. forest service(mt. baker, snoqualmie, wenatchee, gifford-pinchot) river riders, inc. is a non-discrimination company.this site designed and hosted by webnetwork.com.