alberta articles: skiing & snowboarding in canada: worldweb travel guide for alberta, alberta search this site for: alberta skiing & snowboarding in canadathese articles and stories are great reading. you'll want to read them whether you're planning a trip here or you're looking to learn a bit more about your own backyard! heliskiing in the canadian rockies . canada leads the world in heli-skiing, and in the canadian rockies the expertise and years of experience of the heli ski operators really pays off for those seeking this type of adventure experience. in addition the powder of the canadian rockies is unique and such conditions cannot be found anywhere else. the pure atmosphere and untouched landscape of the high rockies defies description. heli-skiing is an expensive proposition, but very few people come away from the experience regretting how much it cost them. (continue) save: put this listing in my travelguide!  edit: make changes to listing skiing and snowboarding in canada . canada offers the world's ski and snowboarding enthusiasts some unique opportunities. a country as large as canada offers a great variety of ski and snowboard hills, and virgin winter terrain, ranging from the atlantic to the pacific coasts. an added attraction to visit this huge country for a winter sports vacation is the relatively low cost compared to other world winter destinations. additionally, canada has a much longer season compared to other places. (continue) save: put this listing in my travelguide!  edit: make changes to listing you are here: home > canada > alberta > articles > skiing & snowboarding in canada itineraryplanner currencyconverter send this siteto a friend linkto us contactus advertisewith us add a freelisting faq published by: important notice:although worldweb travel guide™ strives for accuracy, information should be verified. worldweb travel guide™ will not be held responsible for any consequences arising from errors or omissions. ©1995-2002 world web technologies inc