powder skiing, glacier, avalanche, climbing, mountaineering, and fly fishing courses & courses 1-888-837-5417 (toll free in north america) ...avalanche awareness, glacier travel and powder ski touring expand your skills, and your horizons, with courses and training from heli canada adventures! does powder ski touring tempt you with images of superb backcountry skiing, and adventures worth learning about? how about training in essential winter backcountry travel skills, such as avalanche awareness, and crevasse rescue and glacier travel, in one of canada's most inspiring wilderness settings? heli canada adventures' courses can help, whether you're a novice seeking training in powder ski touring fundamentals, or a seasoned veteran looking to improve your glacier and avalanche skills! our avalanche awareness, powder ski touring, and crevasse rescue and glacier travel courses, set in the rocky mountains near revelstoke, british columbia, canada, are must-have training for those who enjoy backcountry adventures - including snowmobiling, ski touring, snowshoeing, climbing, skiing and snowboarding. soaring peaks, sparkling glacier fields and deep powder snow slopes provide unrivalled terrain for exciting training adventures, and for courses on avalanche characteristics, glacier hazards and the secrets of powder ski touring. heli canada adventures offers winter recreational avalanche courses (rac), which adhere to canadian avalanche association guidelines designed to improve recreational avalanche awareness in canada. we also provide crevasse rescue and glacier travel, and introduction to powder ski touring courses. all of our exclusive courses feature top-notch training from highly qualified acmg guides and subject matter experts. heli canada adventures' courses and training also make ideal corporate teambuilding and incentive program activities, with adventures such as powder ski touring and glacier travel providing a catalyst for the experiential learning that helps individuals become team players, and managers become leaders. we'll work with you to create a customized team building or incentive program that fits your corporate goals, whether your preferred training or incentives are powder ski touring, skiing, glacier travel, avalanche awareness or other backcountry adventures. professional industrial consulting, training and courses in avalanche snow safety are also offered through snotech services inc. for summer adventures, be sure to check out heli canada adventures' summer courses, including heli rock climbing, heli mountaineering, heli fly fishing and heli photography training. overview of courses and training adventures: winter courses: recreational avalanche awareness adhering to canadian avalanche association guidelines, avalanche awareness training is available for those interested in skiing, powder ski touring, powder snowboarding, climbing, snowshoeing and snowmobiling. introductory, advanced and four-day avalanche awareness courses available. $197/pers and up. prices in u.s. dollars. crevasse rescue & glacier travel three-day crevasse and glacier courses covering all the essentials for moving confidently over glaciers while ski touring. includes crevasse rescue training, glacier hazard recognition, whiteout navigation and glacier travel techniques, including skiing. $297/pers and up. prices in u.s. dollars. intro to powder ski touring six-day powder ski touring courses include an introductory recreational avalanche course, plus training on gear, weather, track setting, route finding while skiing, and all the other skills necessary to enjoy backcountry powder ski touring, powder skiing and powder snowboarding. $1137-$1567/pers. prices in u.s. dollars, gst included. summer courses: intro to heli rock climbing heli rock climbing courses include movement on rock, proper use of gear, rock climbing techniques, belaying and setting up top ropes for short climbs and rappelling. these three-day rock climbing courses will suit rock climbing enthusiasts of all expertise levels. $917/pers and up. prices in u.s. dollars. intro to heli mountaineering heli mountaineering courses include moving through mountaineering terrain, crevasse rescue, climbing on snow and ice, anchors, glacier travel, navigation and route finding training. these six-day mountaineering courses are excellent introductions to mountaineering fundamentals. $1537/pers and up. prices in u.s. dollars. intro to heli fly fishing heli fly fishing courses cover entomology, fly fishing techniques and history. training includes three days/four nights of fly fishing from either the shore or belly boats. $2107/pers and up. prices in u.s. dollars. heli photo courses training in the basic principles of exposure control, the use of flash and tripod, and the art of composition. one- and three-day courses available. $507/pers and up. prices in u.s. dollars. please note that heli canada adventures can meet most group training needs, and can accommodate many dates and customized requests, including corporate teambuilding and incentive programs. contact us with details of your needs, and we'll do our best to meet them. click here for an overview of pre-established dates for winter courses, or here for summer courses. exclusive backcountry adventures - it's our guarantee. winter courses: powder ski touring avalanche awareness crevasse rescue summer courses: rock climbing mountaineering fly fishing photo seminars testimonials 1-888-837-5417 (north america toll-free) | home | winter | summer | courses | planning | book now! | about | contact | corporate |