mountainzone.com features snowboarding, skiing, mountain biking, hiking, climbing, expeditions, adventure racing and travel, books, resorts, photography and online shopping featured on mountainzone.com olympic halfpipe women's goldmen's sweep adventure racing new ladies' gearnow more than ever, winter gear makers are factoring in a woman's proportions. 9/11 reality check"mr. happy was suddenly part of a trivial world that no longer existed..." ed viestursviesturs was successful on 8,027-meter shishapangma, a peak on which he had previously reached the slightly lower central summit . conrad ankerconrad anker, who many feel has become america's best-known climber. your feedbackmore than 1000 emails have been received since we said we were back. interviews climbers mountain bikers skiers snowboarders photo galleries scott darsney jimmy chin aid burgess jorge visser news general gear news & reviews mt. biking himalayan series climbing glossary adventure the a-files ski avalanche safety snowboarding trey cook: chamonix send letters to the editor the power of the games for all the hoopla that surrounds the coming of the games, there's a certain amount of sadness that comes with their closing. this seems especially true this year after what a success this international competition was and what a feat the salt lake organizing committee and the international olympic committee pulled off. canadian freeski: death cookiesas the day wore on, the snow pack went from bulletproof to carbon fiber, making it extremely difficult to ski aggressively while also maintaining control. the top five skiers bore out the old yogi berra quip, "it ain't over till it's over." klug takes parallel bronzechris klug upped the us snowboarders' medal count by collecting the fifth u.s. medal, a bronze in the parallel giant slalom, in four snowboarding events. klug, who underwent a liver transplant in july of 2000, said "i didn't give up. that's kind of who i am." freeski spills & thrills just before the rings took over utah, this brutal four-day event went off in snowbird. the skiercross, brutal elbow-to-elbow combat, is followed by the death-defying freeskiing, in which one competitor tumbled over three separate cliff bands. 9 lives: boarding nightmare"this is a backcountry snowboarding story of how i lived to tell you about this backcountry snowboarding story. usually people who make this many mistakes don't get the chance, so here goes...." remembering hans saariski mountaineer andrew mclean pays tribute to his friend who was killed in may 2001 while skiing in chamonix . everest: dave hahnclimber dave hahn fights his emotions on everest as he risks his life to save others. "it was andy lapkass and jaime vinals sitting there on the rocks... thin white linesski mountaineer andrew mclean, with over 50 first descents, brings you his breathtaking steep ski photo essays. 50 favoritesmark kroese's new climbing guide book reflects the breadth of climbing at the millennium. 50 favorite climbs. new art wolfeit took him decades and he has captured the breadth of the range in the high himalaya. snowboarding | mountain biking | hiking | skiing | climbing | photography | adventure | e-mail us top photo: north cascades, by jim nelson, www.promountainsports.com