powder skiing adventure vacations in bc canada heli canada  adventures winter adventures ski touring, heli snowshoeing, powder skiing, powder snowboarding, avalanche courses... summer heli adventures hiking, fly fishing, picnics, rock climbing, mountaineering, backpacking... 1-888-837-5417 (toll free in north america) ...stepping out of reality, into adventure. your adventure! the soaring peaks of the canadian rockies have stretched toward the heavens for millions of years. at their summits, the last ice age lingers, in deep glaciers that feed spectacular winter ice sculptures and cool summer streams. from december to may, it's deep, trackless snow and outstanding powder skiing, snowboarding, ski touring and heli snowshoeing; from june to september, wildflower-studded meadows are the backdrop for summer hiking, fishing and mountaineering. this is the world of heli canada adventures. we can make it yours. winter backcountry adventure begins with heli canada adventures! based in the historic rocky mountain town of revelstoke, british columbia, canada, heli canada adventures features exclusive winter backcountry adventure vacations for travelers who want to experience the mountains at their very best - a vast, pristine wilderness. with some of the world's best backcountry powder skiing, ski touring, heli snowshoeing and powder snowboarding, we are the discerning traveler's first choice for flexibility, quality and experience. we also offer highly-regarded avalanche courses, must-haves for backcountry skiing, ski touring, and other winter adventure enthusiasts. heli canada adventures specializes in small-group backcountry adventure vacations: no more than eight to ten guests travel with each guide on our skiing, snowboarding, ski touring and heli snowshoeing backcountry adventures, and on our avalanche courses. our highly qualified guides take care of every detail, ensuring your comfort and enjoyment while sharing their love for the natural beauty of canada's rockies - whether you're skiing trackless powder or practicing avalanche rescue techniques. powder skiing or snowshoeing ability is not an issue: we tailor our backcountry adventures to your preferred pace and expertise, from novice to expert. and whether you're traveling (or skiing!) as a family, couple or single, we'll make you feel right at home. our trips depart from superb hotels such as revelstoke's coast hillcrest resort and the rogers pass best western, heading into outstanding backcountry powder skiing and ski touring territory. the effort of skiing or snowboarding uphill is rewarded with exhilarating descents, where the best backcountry powder waits! (snowboarding enthusiasts are welcome on all of our winter backcountry adventures, including ski touring: you should be able to move quickly, preferably on a split board.) add adventure to your corporate goals! if you prefer the luxury of private group powder skiing, ski touring, snowboarding or heli snowshoeing adventures, or avalanche courses, we'll work closely with you to customize our exclusive backcountry powder adventures to fit your goals - including private group trips, corporate and executive teambuilding adventures and corporate incentive programs. what better way to build esprit de corps among your senior corporate staff, what better way to reward your top producers, than an exclusive teambuilding adventure or incentive vacation in canada's rockies - ski touring remote slopes, skiing through deep, soft powder...and creating truly inspiring memories? whether you prefer the adventure of a day's powder snowboarding, or the challenge of a multi-day ski touring adventure like the monashee traverse, heli canada adventures offers you exclusive winter backcountry adventure vacations and stunning mountain vistas. come with us, and turn imagination into adventure. call us today at 1-888-837-5417 (toll free in north america) to discuss your next ski touring, heli snowshoeing, powder snowboarding or powder skiing backcountry adventure. if you're already thinking about a summer adventure, we can help: heli hiking, heli fishing, and heli mountaineering are just a few of the summer backcountry adventures we offer, which can also be customized to suit corporate needs, including executive teambuilding and corporate incentive adventure programs. exclusive helicopter vacations - it's our guarantee. | home | winter | summer | courses | planning | book now! | about | contact | corporate |