skiing and snowboarding in canada skiing and snowboarding in canada canada offers affordable, first class skiing and snowboarding in hundreds of ski areas across the country, most of them easily accessible from major cities. the season runs from mid november to late may. in addition to downhill skiing and snowboarding, most of the resorts offer other options, such as marked nordic ski trails, snowshoe touring, heliskiing, para skiing, dogsledding, snowmobiles and other winter fun. downhill skiing in the quest to triumph over snowy mountain and hill, canada is home to some of the best skiers in the world...and a series of excellent resorts. in british columbia, just 90 minutes drive north of vancouver, the wide open trails of whistler and blackcomb will satisfy the most demanding of skiers. they are the two greatest vertical-rise ski mountains in north america and offer the largest expanse of skiable terrain in canada with more than 200 trails, 12 massive bowls including three glaciers. there are also some brilliant, lesser-known resorts in british columbia's interior, such as big white, silver star, apex, fernie snow valley, panorama and sun peaks. calgary, site of the 1988 winter olympics, is gateway to many world-class ski resorts, including sunshine with its wide-open alpine meadows, lake louise with its fabulous views, and the more recently built facilities at kananaskis. in the east, the fabled resorts of mont tremblant and mont sainte-anne offer downhill challenges to both novice and expert, along with the cuisine and apres-ski for which quebec is famous. marble mountain, in newfoundland, extends canada's great skiing all the way to the east coast. british columbia whistler: just 121 km north of vancouver, whistler resort has the most extensive lift system in the world, the greatest vertical rise in north america, and two separate skiing mountains, whistler and blackcomb. there are more than 200 marked trails, and 12 massive alpine bowls including three glaciers. each mountain has a snowboard park. as it is close to the coast, temperatures remain moderate, with excellent snowfalls. whistler is in a class by itself, rated the number one ski resort in north america by every u.s. ski magazine this year. okanagan: this popular region is just a 4 to 5 hour drive from vancouver, or you can fly to into kelowna from vancouver. the resorts hear boast huge, dependable snow falls of featherlight powder. it's home to several charming and challenging resorts, including: - big white - the second largest ski resort in british columbia and a great family mountain. there are over 100 groomed trails on incredibly scenic terrain. - silver star - great family skiing right from the village as well as challenging expert runs in the valley of adventure. silver star is known for its charming klondike-era gold miners' "gaslight village" theme. - apex alpine - great terrain, lots of dry powder snow and plenty of sunshine makes for a great experience. a small, friendly resort with a western ranch theme. - sun peaks, just 53 km north of kamloops, has just undergone a major expansion. it's famous for its dry powder skiing, wide open slopes, huge bowls and beautiful treed glades. it offers one of canada's largest snowboard parks. panorama is nestled amidst the peaks of the purcell range into the british columbia rockies, just two hours drive from calgary. with the second highest vertical in canada after whistler, it's a great family resort with long, well-groomed runs perfect for exciting cruising. its school of skiing is ranked first in canada by ski canada magazine. there is a new extreme dream zone and heli-skiing facility. fernie snow valley resort and kimberley ski resort are also in the b.c. rockies. fernie, an hour from cranbrook airport, or a three hour drive from calgary, has plenty of steep terrain. powder adventure seekers can try out two snowcat skiing operations in the area. kimberley, 15 minutes from cranbrook, has two snowboard parks. the town has a memorable bavarian style ambiance and architecture. alberta banff/lake louise is in one of the world's most beautiful national parks. you can stay at either resort town and use a tri-area pass to ski three great ski fields : - mystic ridge and norquay - a compact valley with a variety of easily-accessed runs just 10 minutes from banff. - lake louise - considered by many to have the most breathtaking alpine scenery of any mountain resort in north america, lake louise sprawls across two mountain faces and offers some of the best skiing and snowboarding in the rocky mountains. - sunshine village - just 20 minutes from banff, and right on the continental divide, sunshine received a phenomenal 17 metres of snow last year. since adding a third mountain to its resort, sunshine now offers 360 degrees of great skiing terrain. 2. kananaskis country, site of the 1988 winter olympics, is a base for downhill skiing at nakiska and fortress mountain, and cross country at the canmore nordic centre. marmot basin; just a 20 minute drive from the town of jasper. the skiing's great, the runs are uncrowded and the national park setting is a scenic wonder. quebec heading east? quebec is home to many fine ski resorts. here are two of the best known. mont tremblant, just north of montreal, has been named the top-ranked ski resort in eastern north america by ski magazine. since its purchase by intrawest (the same developers at whistler resort), it has expanded tremendously and now offers 74 runs and two snowboarding parks. the unique quebecois style village nestled at the base of the mountain on the shores of lac tremblant is famous for its great apres- ski atmosphere. mont-sainte-anne, just 30 minutes drive from quebec city, offers the unique advantage of being a complete winter sports destination just a short drive from one of the most enchanting and historic cities in north america. as well as downhill skiing there's a massive snowboard park, dogsledding, snowshoeing, iceskating, snowmobiling and paragliding. for more travel information on skiing canada visit : skinet canada, whistler/ blackcomb dual mountain, skicentral and ski banff/ lake louise. cross-country skiing the rugged and the refined both await the adventurous traveller who penetrates canada's heartland. superb terrain, accommodations, and equipment are all here: skiers are invited to enter a world that still offers challenges, natural scenery, and unspoiled landscapes. british columbia and alberta offer a thrilling variety of terrains, especially in rocky mountain national and provincial parks. with excellent snow conditions and numerous resorts, they have been canada's premier vacation destinations for years. saskatchewan's prince albert national park, 230 kilometres north of saskatoon, is a cross-country skier's paradise. this vast tract of wilderness is replete with one of the greatest wildlife populations in canada: wild bison, black bears, coyotes, moose, caribou, wolves, and eagles thrive here. in ontario, quebec, and atlantic canada, cross country skiing is a well-established family activity. extensive networks of cross-country trails, many close to urban centres, lead to a backcountry dotted with comfortable chalets and charming inns. seasoned skiers favouring long-distance treks will find much in quebec's varied geography to test their stamina and endurance, particularly in quebec's rugged chic-choc mountains. the atlantic province of nova scotia is blessed with an abundance of undisturbed natural areas. weaving gently through the woodlands, the highlands, and the open fields of nova scotia are more than 2,500 km of new trails. from december through april, these areas are well-maintained playgrounds for cross-country skiers. in february the patchwork vista of the annapolis valley is the setting for the sheffield mills eagle watch. over 200 breeding pairs of bald eagles make nova scotia their home. charming country homes and bed & breakfasts provide comfort, convenience, and old-fashioned nova scotian hospitality for your winter holiday. the tranquil woodlands and winter wonderland are just steps from your back door. try out this great internet site on skiing in canada. | skiing and snowboarding | | snowmobiling | | winter in our great canadian cities | | city nightlife | | winter celebrations| | winter expeditions