overlander sports features snowboarding, skiing, mountain biking, hiking, climbing, expeditions, adventure travel, books, shopping &nbsp &nbsp i am canadian! say it proud with official team canada wear. bauer nike, the official sponsor of team canada hockey, has introduced special-edition hockey products, just in time for the olympics. the jersey, adult glove, pants and hockey bag are emblazoned with the team canada logo as well as the nike swoosh.they offer the great looks and protection of bauer nike technology. support the team as they skate for gold in salt lake city this winter. >>more products<< change is good. so, staff at overlander sports made a new years resolution. their making a switch. a rocky mountain switch. the biggest innovation to come from rocky mountain this year, the switch features a fourth generation suspension system - a new triangulated 4-bar linkage - allowing one of the most versatile freeride bikes on the market. the addition of the 4-bar linkage, with a fox vanilla rl shock in the rear end, means a plush 5 inches of travel that can be locked completely. up front the manitou black fork can be switched on the fly. the bike may not bring peace on earth, but it makes it a better place, for sure. >>more picks<< congratulations to lindsey bolivar for making the national youth women world championships biathlon team. lindsey bolivar of yellowknife, was the only nwt competitor at the national team trials trying for a spot on the youth women world championships team. lindsey qualified for the team with a second place finish overall for the two days of competitions and will now travel to ridnaun italy, january 29 to february 3, 2002 to compete at the world junior and youth championships for canada. faster, steeper, higher, deeper! the best films and videos from the banff mountain film festival will thrill and inspire with amazing big-screen stories and adventures. films will screen at the northern arts and cultural centre, 2pm and 7pm saturday january 16th, 2002. climb some of the highest peaks, paddle some of the wildest waters and journey to some of the most enchanting and beautiful places on the planet.be moved. be inspired. don't miss out. the yellowknife screening is hosted by overlanders sports and blachford lake lodge. this site was changed on monday, january 7th. happy new year from all of us!!! our ski equipment is in! come and take a look! the banff festival of mountain films is on its way!! see it at nacc on january 12, 2002. &nbsp &nbsp