cbc 4 kids: snowboarding snowboarding snowboarding has become a favourite winter activity in canada and around the world. if it keeps gaining popularity, in a few years more people will be snowboarding than skiing! only 10 years ago, there were very few ski resorts that offered a snowboarding hill. some places let snowboarders share a hill with skiers, but the two often got in each other's way. but now almost every ski resort in canada offers runs only for snowboarders. robb gass, executive director of brookvale, a ski and snowboard school in pei, tells cbc's island morning hosts wayne collins and karen mair that snowboarding is becoming a very popular sport. [35 sec.] basic linked turns find an easy slope with plenty of space and start by trying to link just two or three turns together at a time. the fall line a rolling ball takes the most direct path down a slope. this path, shown here as a dotted line, is the fall line. being able to imagine this line will help you choose your route down the slope and decide where to make turns. snowboarders need to be aware of the fall line since they control their speed by turning across it. extending straightening your legs makes you lift up. this takes your weight off the board, making it easier to turn. flexing flexing your knees makes you use your weight to steer and control the board. knowing your limits once you can control your turns, steer, and stop, you can really start to enjoy mountains. but know the limit of your skills and stick to marked runs appropriate for your level of experience. don't be tempted to try the difficult runs yet, or go off the marked routes. show me from the book, "the young snowboarder", by bryan iguchi published in 1997 by stoddart publishing -- isbn 0-7737-3009-5 final tips take your time when turning don't rush to change onto the new edge but allow the board time to slide around. brake if necessary remember your brakes and use them to stop if you feel you are losing control. once you get better at snowboarding, you may want to challenge yourself by trying some of the many different snowboarding activities. freestyle a snowboarder, also called a "boarder", rides a halfpipe, like one used for skateboarders but much larger and made of snow. people turn along the fall line in the centre of the pipe, going from edge to edge. as they lift over an edge, snowboarders do various tricks, like rotating and flipping. boarders are rated by judges. the harder a trick is and the better it's done, the higher the score will be. alpine like skiing, snowboarding has gate-running events, called slalom and giant slalom, where snowboarders go down a curvy course, through many sets of gates. people are disqualified if they miss gates or go off the course. the winner is the one who completes the course in the fastest time. there are also races where the main object is speed. these are called super g. again, if a snowboarder goes off-course, they are out of the race. boardercross this is one of the newer sporting events in snowboarding. racers compete down on obstacle course with many turns and moguls, and try to finish with the fastest time. at the 1998 winter olympic games in nagano, japan, snowboarding made its olympic debut. ross rebagliatti, from whistler, bc, won a gold medal in the giant slalom event. snowboarding has its own lingo or language, one that cbc viewers discovered when they heard the commentators. it's very different from other sport commentary. you can listen to cbc television's snowboarding commentators brenda irving and rob stevens as they covered the first olympic womens' snowboarding giant slalom competition. [2 min., 32 sec.] if you're interested in learning more about snowboarding you should check out snowboarding online. you can find out where you like to snowboard at the ski resorts guide, which provides info about resorts in canada and the u.s. some of the 1999 events take place in canada. if you want to find out about other sports that have been featured as our sport of the month go here! [news & sports] [the lab] [words] [music] [time] [kids club] [homepage] [search] [contact us] [parents info] [teacher's guide] copyright © 2000, canadian broadcasting corporation