guide for canadian skiing & snowboarding holidays in canadaplanning on taking your next skiing or snowboarding holiday in canada? then check out our canadian destination guide for skiing & snowboarding. bags of information on skiing in canada. guide for canadian skiing & snowboarding holidays in canadaback to destination guide main page here whistler whistler, north america's top resort offers the largest ski system, the greatest vertical rise, and the highest speed lifts in the usa, surrounded with spectacular mountain scenery. with over nine metres of annual snowfall, exceptional conditions which are assured from november right through to may. perfectly groomed slopes lead straight into a well-designed, cosmopolitan centre - this is a resort to rival any in europe. lively, friendly and with a relaxed west-coast atmosphere it is hard to leave whistler without a smile on your face the skiing year on year the resort has made big investments in long high-speed lifts. the system is well planned seamlessly linked and you will virtually never queue. snowfall is high and mid-season temperatures never get as icily cold as they do further inland. the skiing is on two mountains, whistler and blackcomb, with immediate access at whistler base station and more than enough skiing up its sleeve for at least a two week break. the majority of slopes are just below the tree line with a host of long, cruisy runs, perfect for confidence building, which meander through the forest. better skiers will love the big bowls of whistler - especially in fresh powder. blackcomb is higher and leading down onto the glacier there are some giddy couloirs. there are plenty of good bump runs on both mountains. a popular innovation is the 'first tracks' breakfast where a small charge takes you up for an early mountain-top breakfast and a chance to ski the powder (or piste) before anyone else. fernie knowledgeable canadians always speak of fernie in reverential tones. with consistently steep fall lines and reliable soft powder, it has always been a dream destination for the good skier and now, with recent big expansion, has considerably wider appeal. the further addition of top quality facilities and lodging, both at the attractive base and friendly village nearby, means that this unpretentious resort is now well and truly on the skiing map high in the heart of the spectacular canadian rockies fernie's snow is supremely plentiful with an average of 350 inches of the white stuff every long season. there is just the one mountain at fernie - but it is hell of a good one! over 2,500 astonishingly uncrowded acres pack in a wide variety of slopes to suit all standards from wide and flattering near the base to impossible chutes at the top. a big advantage is that all lifts access intermediate runs and it is possible for mixed ability groups to pick their own way down. take the timber bowl express, white pass lift and great bear express for example for lots of exciting tree-lined cruising trails. the best variety however is reserved for the adventurous intermediate and advanced skier with a superb variety of tough and advanced terrain. there are no less than twelve bowls for almost unlimited powder adventure, whilst there are also good bumps, quality tree skiing plus gullies, glades and bowls galore. kimberley, with excellent intermediate and good advanced piste, is just over an hour away and accessible by day trip. kicking horse you can expect to hear much more in the very near future about these two affordable resorts. both owned by dynamic international companies they have undergone extensive recent expansion and offer fabulous terrain ideal for able intermediates and upwards with challenging slopes, big off-piste bowls and reliable powder. the scenery is stunning and everyone can enjoy the relaxed, friendly atmosphere. kicking horse, about 90 minutes from lake louise, is ideally situated to enjoy the lightest, driest powder as it falls over the highest parts of the canadian rockies. with the second longest vertical in canada it offers over 4,100 feet of magical skiing accessed by the new golden eagle express gondola which whisks you from resort to summit in a mere 12 minutes. from the peak, after enjoying the amazing views of the mountains there are slopes for all. experienced skiers in particular will revel in the off-piste bowls, tree-skiing and huge blacks which sweep down to the valley whilst intermediates can enjoy the same big vertical descent on easier gladed runs. panorama is very similar - a dream for confident intermediates and better, good for novices but with a limited amount of gentle cruising. also one of the biggest mountains in canada it has around 4,000 feet of vertical with plenty of soft powder and extensive snow cannon cover. from the summit, good skiers can enjoy some wonderful challenging stuff - steep skiing through the trees or soft powder on gentler wooded slopes. across the whole of the mountain long, often steepish, runs cut through the trees and provide loads of variety for many days of exciting skiing. beginners and children are well looked after on good greens and a few easy blues near the base. banff/lake louise not only home to fabulous skiing surrounded by some of the finest mountain scenery in the world this area provides some of the best value too. fortunately winter is regarded as low season and skiers can take advantage of luxurious ski lodging at prices as stunning as the scenery. add a liberal coating of light and powdery snow and loads of canadian hospitality and it's not hard to see why loyal skiers hurry back year after year on one shared pass, the three mountains contain enough variety to satisfy every skiing appetite. with the high altitude, the thirty foot or so of snow that falls is reliably powdery and the season stretches from early december into may. both resorts access all three areas. mt norquay is local to banff, which lies ten minutes away. it has pleasantly wooded slopes to suit all standards and some night skiing. sunshine village twenty minutes from banff is the highest resort in canada and enjoys the areas snowiest location. with recent expansion to over 3,300 acres, there is much memorable skiing for everyone, mostly above the tree line and especially above and around sunshine village. advanced skiers will particularly approve of the many black runs on goats eye mountain. lake louise is the biggest area a further 30 minutes from banff. amongst the biggest acreage in north america, it is predominantly enjoyable, intermediate cruising on the wooded south face with tougher runs higher up. there are steep blacks, back bowls and tree skiing too with more over the back and on larch mountain - all fortunately navigable by skiers of all levels. the small and pretty resort of jasper lies a spectacular three-hour drive north of lake louise and good for a two-centre holiday. the recently expanded marmot basin about12 miles away, provides a good range for all ski levels with an efficient 9-lift system and 1,500 acres of terrain. families can take advantage of the kids ski free offer for under 12's. ski-slopes.com listed in linksmatch.complanning on taking your next skiing or snowboarding holiday in canada? then check out our canadian destination guide for skiing & snowboarding. bags of information on skiing in canada. planning on taking your next skiing or snowboarding holiday in canada? then check out our canadian destination guide for skiing & snowboarding. bags of information on skiing in canada. planning on taking your next skiing or snowboarding holiday in canada? then check out our canadian destination guide for skiing & snowboarding. bags of information on skiing in canada.