skiing and snowboarding in canada skiing and snowboarding in canada by worldweb travel guide catching air in whistlerphoto courtesy of luke macmillan canada offers the world's ski and snowboarding enthusiasts some unique opportunities. a country as large as canada offers a great variety of ski and snowboard hills, and virgin winter terrain, ranging from the atlantic to the pacific coasts. an added attraction to visit this huge country for a winter sports vacation is the relatively low cost compared to other world winter destinations. additionally, canada has a much longer season compared to other places. if you include heli-skiing it is possible to partake in winter sports all year round. otherwise a lot of hills are open a full five months from november through to the middle of april. in the west a few resorts open even longer. as well as downhill skiing and snowboarding there is great cross-country skiing available in every province and territory. every region of canada (even the prairies) has ski hills available. many of these ski hills away from the main skiing centres are very good, and they are far too numerous to mention them indiviudally. the best skihills however are in western canada in the british columbia rockies and the alberta rockies and at whistler b.c., with excellent hills also available in québec and newfoundland. please refer to the canadian ski & snowbaord map for resort locations. specialty skiing in canada helicopter skiing - canmore, abphoto courtesy of alpine helicopters canada also provides great opportunities for backcountry skiing - this is downhill skiing on snow that shows no sign of previous human presence. in canada various methods of reaching backcountry ski runs have been devised. factors such as weather, skill levels and equipment should be considered when selecting the right experience. one of these methods that is particularly spectacular is for advanced and intermediate skiers only - helicopter skiing. heli-skiing was first devised in british columbia back in 1965. a helicopter takes skiers up to high elevations in the mountains to ski (or snowboard) on virgin snow. cat skiing is another popular method of skiing that is widely used in canada. this is similar to heli-skiing in that it brings skiers and snowboarders to virgin territory near the top of the mountain, but this time in a snowcat vehicle. this has the tracks of a military tank and the body of a snowplow with a passenger cab mounted on it, and it can drive through virtually any type of terrain. the main advantage of this is that skiing is guaranteed no matter how hard it is snowing. the sport of telemarking is becoming increasingly popular. this is a hybrid form of both downhill and cross-country skiing which enables both techniques to be used in back country runs. a ski with the width of a cross-country but with most of the features of a downhill ski is used. telemarking is especially challenging and very technical. costs and rentals as a very rough guideline, the average price for a lift ticket for the day in a canadian resort ranges from $25cdn for a quieter less challenging hill, up to $75cdn for a world class resort such as whistler. equipment rental is available at resorts across the country for both snowboarders and skiers. climate obviously the average temperature will remain below zero celsius (there wouldn't be much snow otherwise.) with the right clothing, (layers work best to allow for variances in temperature) conditions are usually very comfortable. although the temperatures are cool, the sun is nearly always shining and, (especially at high alpine altitudes) sunscreen is an absolute necessity. without it there is a high probability of getting badly burned. of course in any part of canada temperatures can drop very rapidly and conditions can become totally unsuitable. once the temperature gets below minus 20 celsius, the average person would probably prefer to stay indoors. during daylight hours this does not happen as often as one may think, and when it does it presents a great opportunity to enjoy the other attractions of your destination. newfoundland newfoundland seems a surprising location for winter sports, but its relative isolation does not change the fact that the opportunities for skiing and snowboarding here are considered by many to be canada's best anywhere east of the rockies (though some in québec may disagree.) as the rockies are thousands of kilometres away for the bulk of the north american population, a winter vacation in newfoundland can be a very acceptable alternative for those who live closer to the east coast of the continent. the centre of all this winter activity is in the west of the island at marble mountain. this area has an average annual snowfall of five metres, and excellent conditions for downhill and cross-country skiing, snowboarding and snow-mobiling. there is around 150 acres of skiing terrain available here. the lift lines are minimal, and the prices are well below average. the vertical lift is 1600 feet and some excellent terrain provides great opportunities. it ranges from long, relatively flat trails to some outstanding, steep and gnarly groomed and bump runs. for boarders a pipe has been constructed which has proven very popular. there is also a huge lodge at the base of the hills for great apres-ski in a very casual style. cat skiing is also very good here. marble mountain is located south of gros morne national park (which also has excellent cross-country and other winter sports facilities), and just west of the city of corner brook. the closest airport is at deer lake. marble mountain is still a well-kept secret. in fact local newfoundland skiers like to keep it this way. combined with the charm of the newfoundland people, and their unique culture and humour, this is an ideal destination for those who want to go somewhere different away from the glitz of the larger resorts. newfoundland is perfect for the serious skier of any level looking for a quieter area and at a lower price. québec skiing at mont sainte-annephoto courtesy of daniel lessard, © tourisme québec travelling west, the next excellent skiing area is the laurentian mountains of québec. many of the resorts here also lay claim to the title of "best skiing east of the rockies". depending on the destination, the area can be reached in one to two hours drive north of the wonderful city of montréal (a great pre or post snow destination). the laurentians provide a good winter sport location for many in québec, ontario and the north eastern u.s.a. the region has over 20 resorts and over 350 ski runs. around 30% of these are now illuminated for night skiing and snowboarding. there is extensive variety of facilities with something for everyone from novice to expert. cross-country skiing is also excellent. amongst the laurentian resorts are mont olympia a good location for beginners and closer to montréal. as a rough equation, the more challenging the ski hill, the further north it is located, although most resorts have junior slopes as well. the most well known resort is mont tremblant with a vertical drop of 650 metres and world class facilities. the entertainment and accommodations here are very good and there is a wide selection. cross-country skiers are also well provided for at many areas around the region, in particular around mont tremblant and mont sainte-anne. the added attraction of québec skiing is that the french-canadian influence and ambiance in the laurentians is unique in north america. the alberta rockies way out west and a five hour flight from montréal lie the alberta rockies. the ski resorts here are excellent, and it is little wonder that people come from all over the world to ski and board the fine powder here. there are world class resorts at marmot basin near jasper, lake louise and sunshine (between lake louise and banff). for steep moguls and tree runs, try the smaller resort of banff norquay. norquay has an amazing selection of terrain for its size. the site of the downhill skiing for the 1988 olympics isnakiska, in kananaskis country, obviously the facilities alone are worth seeing. all these resorts are good for all levels of skiing, and wherever you choose, it will definitely be the skiing experience of a lifetime. these are close to either the famous town of banff or the slightly less well known resort of jasper. banff is very international and has renowned hotels, fine dining and excellent shopping. jasper is much quieter but with excellent accommodations and facilities for an 'away from it all' vacation. the british columbia rockies flying high - the bc rockies west over the spine of the rockies will find you in the british columbia rockies. with a less severe climate than alberta, winter sports facilities in the bc rockies are outstanding. the major ski resorts include kimberley and fernie - famous for its powder - located in the southeast of the region near to cranbrook. northwest of cranbrook is the spectacular panorama mountain village. panorama is a completely self-contained winter sports resort with accommodations and every facility on hand. fairmont is another well-equipped resort in this area. in the southwest of the b.c. rockies, near to the towns of nelson and castlegar are the ski resorts of whitewater and red mountain. as well as downhill skiing these resorts have excellent snowboarding (with the exception of red mountain). for the cross-country skier there are numerous trails throughout the region. heli-skiing and cat skiing are also available in many places. whistler, bc last and certainly not least (actually canada's and maybe even the world's best) is the winter resort par excellence - whistler. if you like bustling, glamorous ski resorts combined with great hills, whistler is the right choice. just a few hundred kilometres west of the bc rockies, and just over an hour north of vancouver, whistler simply defies description. it has to be witnessed, and every winter sports fan should make it a goal to visit here at least one time. the two ski hills here - blackcomb mountain and whistler mountain - are adjacent to each other and both offer spectacular skiing and boarding, and yet have different characteristics to provide a tremendous variety. another great feature here is the whistler village the main town site. the village, with all the incredible facilities it is so well known for, will really help to round off a great ski or snowboard vacation. everything for your enjoyment and convenience is here, including fine dining or fast food (and everything in between), great entertainment and every type of accommodation from deluxe resorts to simple but well-equipped apartments. grabbing for style - whistler, bcphoto courtesy of luke macmillan there are numerous reasons that whistler is the number one ski resort in north america. it should also be noted that with the ever-increasing popularity of snow boarding, whistler has fantastic facilities for this sport and is widely considered to be the ultimate destination for the dedicated boarder. for both the skier and snowboarder the whistler area has 12 bowls, three glaciers and over 200 marked trails. there are powder chutes, excellent moguls, well-groomed cruising runs and secluded tree skiing. whistler has 7,071 acres of terrain that is available for skiers and boarders, making it the largest ski area on the continent. whistler mountain and blackcomb mountain are the two greatest vertical rise ski mountains in north america. blackcomb mountain rises one vertical mile (5,280 feet) to an elevation of 7,494 feet and whistler mountain nearly as much - 5,020 feet to an elevation of 7,160 feet. the resort has five separate mountain bases from which to start trips up to the ski runs. these bases are all within five minutes of each other and all have a variety of high-speed lifts to enable easy and fast access to the ski areas with a minimum of lift line-ups. there are a total of 32 lifts in the area. whistler has a fantastic selection of accommodations in the villages and with many of these you can ski in and out. the ski season here runs from november through to june, with summer skiing available on hortsman glacier until august. article index banff mount norquay banff's best kept secret the ski stop, banff can provide all of your vacation equipment requirements. ski marmot basin nestled in the spectacular rocky mountains near jaspercardinal travel tours - exceptional value in journeys of discovery to canada & alaskasheraton hamilton hotel - featuring 299 deluxe guest rooms!westin ottawa just blocks from parliament hill and historic byward market you are here: home > canada > ontario > articles > skiing & snowboarding in canada > editorial published by: important notice:although worldweb travel guide™ strives for accuracy, information should be verified. worldweb travel guide™ will not be held responsible for any consequences arising from errors or omissions. ©1995-2002 world web technologies inc