earthlab winter storm case study winter storm: a case study what is a case study? all storms have a story. the stories are as different as the storms are. the characters in a storm story are not people or animals. instead, they are weather systems with winds and temperatures and rain, snow and sunshine. places become important, too. meteorologists call a storm story a "case study." this case study -- or storm story -- is about a winter storm that dumped a record 19.7 inches of snow on columbia, missouri, between january 18 and january 21, 1995. it also left 12.6 inches of snow in madison, wisconsin, in a single day. other towns had snow records, too, since the storm had heavy snow and high winds. it was a very big and very strong storm. besides making a lot of snow, this storm produced ten tornadoes in the southern united states. large size image small size image snow band total accumulation, 19 january 1995 prepared by jonathon martin, department of atmospheric and oceanic sciences, university of wisconsin, madison this figure shows the total snowfall in centimeters for the 19 jan 1995 storm. lines connect all points reporting the same snowfall amounts in centimeters. bands of 10 cm snow depth are indicated with the shading code shown in the table. how did the storm begin? this storm began in much the same way that many storms begin. a cold front ran from canada down to texas. the winds near the cold front over texas began blowing in a counterclockwise pattern. surface map, 18 january 1995 a warm front was found on the east coast of the united states. in the south along the gulf states, warm humid air made a lot of fog to the east of the cold front. in the northern states along the canada border, snow was falling in the cold air. there was rain from indiana to the south. in texas and louisiana, there were thunderstorms and rainshowers. radar map, 1200 z, 18 january 1995 what about that upper air? there is a lot of air above us, much more than we can easily see. the air just over the earth is the surface air. but far above that, is what meteorologists call "upper air." we will look at one level near the earth's surface, which is not quite 5000 feet above the surface in the midwest. this level is near where small planes fly. the next level is about 18,000 feet that is about half way up in the region where most of the weather occurs. the highest level is about 30,000 feet, where jet aircraft often fly. this level is where the strong winds, called the jet stream, can be found. in the three levels of upper air, many different weather conditions can be happening at the same time. in our storm story, a lot was happening. 500 mb map, 18 january 1995 two cyclone patterns were joined by a trough of low air pressure in the lowest upper air level. in the next level up, a deep trough of low pressure led from canada to texas. and in the top level of the upper air, the low air pressure was surrounded by a region of 115 mile per hour winds. on the surface 12 hours later surface map, 19 january 1995 a low pressure area formed to the east of texas and moved to the northeast. more cyclone winds formed. thunderstorms and rain happened over mississippi and louisiana. as the storm continued to move northeast and the temperatures cooled, heavy snow began to fall over oklahoma and missouri. jumping back to the upper air the low pressure area in the upper air was moving, too. it was moving east. in the lowest level, some strong cyclone wind patterns were found over arkansas. the wind was moving faster here. in the middle layer, the low pressure area still ran from canada to texas. in the highest air level, a thin low pressure area had formed from canada to texas. very fast winds called "jet winds" or "jet streams" were racing alongside the low pressure area. some winds were 126 miles per hour above texas. 500 mb map, 19 january 1995 back down on the surface radar map, 1200 z, 19 january 1995 the low pressure area on the surface moved northeast during the night. by midnight, it had reached memphis, tennessee. farther south, rain was still falling in the warm air. to the north, the areas where it had been snowing still had snow. by the next morning, the cyclone winds were moving north along the mississippi river traveling through st. louis, missouri. winds were still strong. sub-freezing temperatures were near the great lakes region and plains states. snow was falling from southeast wisconsin to iowa, missouri, and arkansas. the storm reached northwest indiana by thursday evening. strong northwest winds pulled cold air toward the south. the snow belt was now from northeastern wisconsin, down the mississippi river valley to southern missouri and then eastward into western kentucky. by friday, the low pressure area at the surface was moving east slowly. the cold front caught up with the warm front near cape cod, massachusetts. snow was thinning out over the region. surface map, 20 january 1995 what's happening up there? in the upper air regions, some interesting things were happening. the low pressure areas in the three levels were moving so that they ended up stacked like three giant bagels one on top of each other. by the time this had happened, the storm was losing strength and the snows were turning to rain. by saturday morning, the storm was over. return to text level page return to topics page switch to higher reading level