winter activities travel and tourism guide,bc canada. / beautifulbc.net contact us | add a listing vancouver coast & mountains | whistler | other vancouver ski areas | the islands | bc rockies | thompson okanagan | cariboo chilcotin coast | northern bc | helicopter skiing & snowboarding | cat powder skiing | hot springs | skijoring or dogsledding | winter in british columbia from the sticky wet coastal mountain snowslopes of mount washington, the biggest ski resort on vancouver island, to the legendary world's best ski runs of whistler / blackcomb, grouse mountain, cypress bowl and mount seymour in vancouver, coast & mountains; from the powdery snow of the dry interior desert mountains apex, big white, silver star in the thompson okanagan region, with more than a dozen cross-country ski trail networks and numerous snowmobile trails, to the powder snow of the bugaboo mountains in the kootenays, the famed snowslopes of the canadian rockies; from the world-renowned cross-country skiing trails near the community of 100 mile house to dogsledding, snowmobiling, ice-fishing in cariboo chilcotin coast, a region of tremendous contrast, british columbia's magnificent ski areas truly have something for everyone! vancouver, coast & mountains whistler whistler is known as the "top-ranked destination resort in north america". the beautiful, spectacular and natural setting of whistler / blackcomb mountains offers a bounty of activities that makes the resort an ideal getaway. winter in whistler, with incredible skiing and snowboarding at both whistler and blackcomb mountains, and its panoramic scenery of majestic summits and deep forested valleys, is what has made the area world-renowned for and keeps a reputation as north america's #1 ski destination. but whistler resort is more than just world-class skiing, its coast mountain setting offers visitors a wide variety of both winter and summer activities. both whistler and blackcomb mountains are now one resort. north's america's greatest vertical drops are found in whistler: 1,609 vertical meters (5,280 feet) on blackcomb mountain, and 1,520 vertical meters (5,020 feet) on whistler mountain. also provides an hourly lift capacity of 54,000 skiers, an abundance of bowls, glades, steeps, powder and over 200 ski runs are served by 28 lifts covering over 29 square kilometers (11 sq. miles) of skiable terrain. in addition to the downhill ski facilities, winter visitors enjoy swimming, cross-country skiing, dogsledding, heli-skiing, ice skating, snowboarding, ice climbing, snowmobiling, sleigh-riding, snowshoeing, paragliding, sking the blackcomb glacier, back country adventure tours, and rejuvenating at one of whistler's luxurious spas. summer in whistler is just as spectacular as winter. mountaintop sightseeing, world-class golf, flightseeing, fishing, mountain biking, hiking, swimming, and even glacier skiing, just to mention a few of the opportunites the area provides. nestled at the base of the mountains is whislter's award-winning pedestrian-style village, where cars are strictly off-limits. modeled after a small european village and designed in a distinctive mountain resort architecture, whistler village is perfectly situated for easy access to both mountains and to great shopping, world-class dining, non-stop nightlife, abundance of slopeside accommodations and a wide variety of activities. how to get there: whistler resort is located 120 kms (75 miles) north of vancouver along the sea-to-sky highway (hwy 99). whistler can be reached by regularly-scheduled bus servicefrom downtown vancouver and voncouver international airport. charter bus, limousine, taxi and helicopter services are also available from the airport and downtown. bc rail offers daily train service on the cariboo prospector from its depot in north vancouver. other vancouver ski areas the vancouver coast & mountains region is also home to other spectacular mountains. three areas on vancouver's north shore - "cypress bowl, grouse mountain and mount seymour" - offer great skiing, snowboarding, snowshoeing, cross-country skiing, dogsledding, snowmobiling, etc. this region has it all. cypress bowl: located about 25 kms (16 miles) from downtown vancouver, nestled between to mountains: mount strachan to the north and black mountain to the south. cypress bowl features 25 runs and 533 meters (1,750 feet) of vertical drop. cypress bowl offers the visitor a host of other activities including a tubing chute and lift, a toboggan hill and 16 kms (19 mi) of cross-country skiing trails. grouse mountain: known as "the peak of vancouver", is located 15 minutes from downtown vancouver. grouse mountain offers visitors a wide variety of mountain-top experiences such as: skating, snowshoeing, sleigh riding, skiing, cross-country skiing, snowboarding. the mountain features 13 runs designed for every ability descend down 369 meters ( 1,210 feet) of vertical. mount seymour: located 30 minutes from downtown vancouver, is renowned for its ski and snowboard school. mount seymour features 340 meters (1,115 feet) of vertical drop, 21 runs, 3 chairlifts, and 3 terrain parks - brockton, mystery peak and mushroom junior park - for spectacular rides. experience a day on western canada's first snow tubing park or take a snowshoe tour through some of the coast mountains' forested areas. hemlock valley ski resort: known as the fraser valley's family resort offers 3 chairlifts, a handle tow, beginner / intermediate / advanced terrain, snowshoeing, back-country skiing, tobogganing, snowmobiling and much more. manning park resort: is a year-round family resort in the middle of manning provincial park near the city of hope. experience snowboarding, downhill and cross-country skiing, four lifts and much more. the islands vancouver island and the gulf islands has canada's mildest climate, where you can go skiing in the morning and then go sailing in the afternoon. the area offers many other winter activities including snowshoeing, back-country skiing, tobogganing, snowmobiling, storm watching and more. vancouver island is home to spectacular mountains: forbidden plateau: located in the courtenay/comox area boasts an elevation of 366 meters (1,200 feet), a vertical drop of 320 meters (1,050 feet) and four lifts in total. mount cain: located on northern vancouver island between campbell river and port mcneil, offering 500 meters (1,500 feet) of vertical drop, 16 runs and two chair lifts. mt. washington alpine resort: the island's biggest ski resort is located in vancouver island's comox valley alongside strathcona, bc's oldest provicial park. mt. washington features a 505 meter (1,657 feet) of vertical drop, 8 lifts including the new eagle express quad chair, the green chair, the rope tow , the poma lift, the red and whiskey jack chairs, 25 kms (25 mi) of track-set and skating cross-country trails, snowshoe trails, and day & night snow tubing. the mountain receives as much as 13 metres (511 inches) of snow each season. thompson okanagan known as "bc's ski country" the thompson okanagan region boasts a combination of dry powder, dazzling sunshine and the beautiful monashee mountains. its great temperate climate and wide variety of winter sporting activities will make your stay pleasant. some of the best downhill and nordic skiing is possible, as well as dogsledding or skijoring, a new (old) sport: (cross country skiers being pulled by one to three dogs in harness), snowmobile tours, ice-fishing, cross-country skiing, outdoor skating, tobogganing, snowshoeing, hockey pond, sleigh rides, night skiing, indoor rock climbing wall, and snowmobile park for kids. here you will find great destination resorts featuring terrain and services worthy of international attention. silver star mountain resort: features two distinct ski areas - vance creek's smooth slopes for novice and intermediates, and putnam creek with 52 trails for the experts, known as the "valley of adventure", plus quadruple chairlifts, gladed tree skiing, moguls and hidden powder stashes. the majority or runs are rated single or double-black diamond. at the base of the mountain sits klondike, a boomtown. visitors will enjoy lots of winter activities, including snowboarding, dogsledding, snowmobiling, tobogganing, ski and snowboard school packages, sleigh rides and much more. the resort offers a variety of dining choices and accommodation. big white ski resort: boasts 8 sq.km (3 sq. mi) of skiable terrain, a 2,438 meter (8,000 feet) gem lake express quad chairlift, the 3,000 sq.meter (32,000 sq.ft) village centre, 12 new intermediate/expert runs, more than 100 marked runs, plus many unmarked. experience also snowboarding, cross-country skiing, night skiing, skating, snowmobiling and private ski lessons. big white receives as much as 7.5 meters (24 feet) of annual snowfall, so light and so dry that is known as the "champagne powder". the resort offers a wide variety of accommodation and excellent restaurants. sun peaks mountain resort : boasts more than 80 trails and glades cascades from the the high alpine of tod mountain to the pedestrian base village. there's also an ideal mix of terrain for novice, intermediate and experts, 3 quads, including two high-speed chairs, alpine bowls, broad cruising runs and the sun peaks resort's vertical drop of 882 meters (2,894 ft.), the highest in bc ski country. sun peaks receives an annual average snowfall of more than 5 meters ( 17 feet). experience also snowboarding, snowshoeing, horse-drawn sleigh rides, as well as excellent restaurants located in the pedestrian village. stay and enjoy the many accommodations sun peaks resort has to offer. apex mountain resort: here you will find sunny skies, abundant snowfall and a quaint and wild-west theme village. apex offers 3 different ski areas, the quickdraw express quad, and the stocks chair servicing apex's vast experts and intermediate terrains. visitors will enjoy also: - cross-country skiing, snowmobile tours, private ski lessons, dogsledding, snowshoeing, horse-drawn sleigh rides and much more. the resort offers a wide variety of dining choices and accommodation. mount baldy: is one of the okanagan's best skiing destination, boasting double chairlift to access 1,500 vertical feet of glades and dry powder, ski school, 16 trails, 445 meters (1,460 feet) of vertical drop. mount baldy family ski area offers great dining and excellent accommodations. harper mountain: located near the city of kamloops, harper mountain has a triple chair, t-bar, handle tow, beginner / intermediate / expert terrain. facilities includes ski school, night skiing, cross-country skiing, tubing and more. b.c. rockies the b.c. rockies is a region of pure, pristine wilderness, close to several of canada's best-known national parks - yoho, glacier, mount revelstoke and kootenay - and historic rogers pass. the bc rockies offers excellent back country and heli-skiing, snowshoeing, snowmobiling, dogsledding, ice climbing, as well as great destination resorts. the region, which can be accessed by air through either castlegar or cranbrook, is blanketed by deep, fresh and dry powdery snow. kimberley alpine resort: here, at the base of the mountain, you will find the kimberley alpine resort, one of bc's well-known family ski and snowboard destinations, offering all kind of winter activities as well as excellent dining and accommodation. rising from the resort, kimberley's new north star express provides access to wide-open intermediate/expert terrain and runs. the main run, near the maverick t-bar, is one of north america's longest illuminated night skiing runs. the city of kimberley nearby, known as the "bavarian city of the rockies", offers many other attractions, including the "platz", a beautiful pedestrian-only town square. also nearby is fort steele heritage town. fernie alpine resort: here you will find a mix of novice, intermediate and advanced terrain, the steepest fresh powder skiing is found in cedar bowl, cedar ridge and timber bowl/white pass area and near fernie is the deer chair and el-quad lifts which service many novice runs. experience alpine and snowboard lessons, snowmobiling, sleigh rides, snowshoeing tours, cross-country skiing and more. five kilometres (3 miles) of the fernie alpine resort, nestled in a valley surrounded by rugged peaks, is the beautiful town of fernie offering all kind of amenities. red mountain: the ski area's two mountains - red and granite - are known for their expert-only black diamond terrain, and the abundance of intermediate and beginner trails. definetely red mountain is the place to head for trees, glades and powder. nearby is rossland considered one of the most historic ski towns in western canada, offering fine dining, accommodation, day and night snowmobile tours, cross-country skiing and more. whitewater ski resort: whitewater features two chairlifts, a handle-tow, 400 meters (1,300 feet), intermediate/advanced cruising runs, back country touring excellent for snowboarders. just a short, half-hour drive from whitewater is the town of nelson offering the visitor all kind of amenities. fairmont ski area: set against the majestic rocky mountains near kootenay national park, fairmont ski area is unique in western canada. fairmont offers novice/intermediate terrain, a triple chair, and private lessons. after a whole day on the slopes take a soothing bath in canada's largest odourless hot mineral pools at fairmont hot springs. panorama mountain village: spectacular scenery, a beautiful mountain village and more than 1,200 vertical meters (4,000 feet) of skiing terrain, steep glades and big moguls. panorama boasts one of the highest vertical drops in canada next to whistler/blackcomb and the best groomed cruising terrain. other activities you can enjoy: - snowboarding, hot springs tours, heli-skiing, heli-snowshoeing, cross-country ski trails, skating, and back country snowmobiling. located in the valley, about 18 kms (11 mi) from the ski area, is the town of invermere, welcoming the visitor with all kind of amenities. ski salmo: the ski area offers 2 lifts and terrain for either beginner / intermediate / expert. experience skiing, snowboarding, ice skating, snowmobiling, tobogganing, and night skiing. whitetooth ski area / golden peaks resort: located near golden, the ski area offers 1,245 meters (4,085 feet) of vertical drop, 2 lifts, a ski school, snowboarding, snowmobiling, cross-country skiing , back country skiing, night skiing, gondola, teahouse, and accommodations. powder springs resort: located in revelstoke, the resort offers a chairlift, a handle tow, a snowoard park and a daylodge. it is also the base for revelstoke's cat powder skiing operation. cariboo chilcotin coast mount timothy: located 23 kms (14 mi) east of lac la hache, has a vertical of 259 meters (850 feet), t-bar, handle tows and 26 runs from beginner to expert. experience snowboarding, snowshoeing, cross-country skiing, snowmobiling, dogsledding, ice-fishing and more. overnight accommodations are available nearby. troll resorts ltd.: located near quesnel, troll features 518 meters (1,700 feet) of vertical, 14 runs and 4 t-bars. the resort offers all sort of amenities to visitors. experience nearby snowboarding, snowshoeing, cross-country skiing, snowmobiling, dogsledding and more. northern b.c. shames mountain: located near terrace offering 19 trails, a vertical drop of 497 meters (1,630 feet), terrain park, 3 lifts and ski & snowboard schools. other activities for visitor to enjoy nearby are snowboarding, cross-country skiing, dogsledding, snowshoeing, snowmobiling, and ice-fishing. ski smithers: 533 meters (1750 feet) of vertical , 3 lifts, ski and snowboard schools and 2 mountain restaurants. ski smithers has an average annual snowfall of 5.5 meters (18 feet). enjoy snowboarding, cross-country skiing, dogsledding, snowshoeing, and snowmobiling. powder king: 21 trails, 2 lifts, snow park, two mountain restaurants and rentals. powder king receives as much as 10 meters (33 feet) of snow each season. experience snowshoeing, snowboarding, cross-country skiing, and snowmobiling. murray ridge ski area: located in fort st. james, has 20 kms (12 mi) of groomed cross-country trails and half-pipes, excellent for experiencing great skiing, snowshoeing, snowmobiling, snowboarding and skijoring. helicopter skiing and snowboarding the selkirk, monashee, bugaboo, purcell, cariboo, chilcotin and coast mountains are all perfect destinations to experience the ultimate winter adventure, "heli-skiing and snowboarding." commercial helicopter skiing was invented in british columbia in 1965. today, this ultimate winter adventure has expanded to virtually every mountain range in the province. except for the islands, heli-skiing is offered in each of bc's tourism regions.you can either try helicopter skiing for a day or for all-inclusive week-long packages, being able to ski from the fluffiest, driest powder to the fastests corn snow across an entire mountain range - up to 7,700 sq.ft (3,00 sq.mi) of terrain -. guests stay in either remote luxury mountain lodges or in hotels. there are several helicopter ski operators in the region offering excellent and affordable packages. cat powder skiing snowcats are similar to grooming machines found at downhill ski areas. these machines, with custom-built climate-controlled cabs, seat up to a dozen skiers to drive them to the summit for a breathtaking scenery and the ultimate skiing and snowboarding adventure. skiers will enjoy some of the best powder skiing in the world. snowcat skiing is best described as "the powderhound's alternative to downhill resort skiing." snowcat operations range from week-long luxury accommodations to day-skiing proprietors. this sport is specially popular in the b.c. rockies tourism region. hot springs british columbia is home to a number of soothing hot springs. after a long day on the slopes relax and rejuvenate in one of these pools containing natural ingredients like sodium, calcium, lithium, strontium and magnesium. radium hot springs: located at the end of a drive through bc's spectacular kootenay national park is radium hot springs boasting two pools, one at 40 c (104 f) and the other at 27 c (81 f). other activities in the area include ice-fishing, skating, alpine skiing, snowshoeing, and snowmobiling. halcyon hot springs resort: halcyon has 4 pools ranging in temperature from 29 c ( 85 f) to 35-42 c (95-107 f). these mineral waters have a unique combination of natural healing qualities. nearby you can go fishing and snowmobiling. the resort offers all kind of amenities and facilities. fairmont hot springs resort: the fairmont hot springs resort offers a 40 c (104 f) hot mineral pool, glacier mud treatments and aromatherapy massages. other activities and attractions are: downhill skiing and snowboarding, heli-skiing and fort steele heirtage town, an 1890s gold rush town. ainsworth hot springs resort: boasts three hot pools ranging in temperature from 30-43 c (85-110 f), located near kootenay lake. the resort offers visitors a wide variety of accommodations and fine dining. canyon hot springs resort: is located between mt. glacier and mt. revelstoke national parks in the spectacular selkirk mountains, just minutes from revelstoke. temperature range from 26 c (80 f) for the swimming pool to 40 c (104 f) for the hot pool. other activities in the area include back country skiing, snowmobiling and cross-crountry skiing. the resort features cabins, cottages, a campsite, an rv park and a café. liard river hotsprings provincial park: located 317 kms (197 mi) northwest of fort nelson, is known as the "liard tropical valley." the two hot mineral pools help foster lush vegetation which wouldn't normally survive at this latitude. the park offers 53 campsites, picnic shelters, playground, walking trails and all facilities. nakusp hot springs: is nestled near the banks of the kuskanax river in the selkirk mountain range of south central bc. the springs' two pools, boasting the cleanest mineral springs in bc., are drained and replenished daily, which can reach temperatures higher than 40 c ( 104 f) in winter. nakusp hoat springs features campsites and other amenities. harrison hot springs: located two hours east of vancouver and 25 minutes from the community of chilliwack. the springs boast five pools, including three outdoor and two indoor, reaching temperatures of up to 40 c (104 f). harrison hot springs resort offers full facilities, restaurants and accommodation. copyright © 1999-2001 c.h computer services