winter 2002 regional updates-eastern canada and northeast u.s. dr. t.w. bruulsema eastern canada and northeast u.s. director dr. tom bruulsema, a native of ancaster, ontario, covers the eastern canada and northeast u.s. region for ppi/ppic. his research program focuses on the benefits of p and k for the crops of the region, and his educational activities feature responsible, science-based use of fertilizer nutrients. before joining the institute as regional director in 1994, dr. bruulsema held a research associate position at the university of minnesota. he holds a ph.d. in soil science from cornell university. he also has experience in international agriculture, having served four years with the mennonite central committee as research agronomist in bangladesh. he currently serves as president-elect for the northeast branch of the american society of agronomy and soil science society of america. he has also been active in promoting the certified crop adviser (cca) program, currently chairing the ontario board and serving as canadian representative to the international board. fall 2000 spring 2001 summer 2001 fall 2001 northcentral united states midwest united states western united states eastern canada & northeast u.s. western canada great plains southeast united states choose a topic narrowing the gap fertility checklist efu manual agri-facts the environment fertility quiz links article archive quick tips crop nutrient utilization nutrient deficiency symptoms comments search home while prices for corn, soybeans and wheat have been weak, milk prices in the northeast u.s. are strong. this gives dairy producers the ability to invest in sound soil fertility management. soybean acreage continues to expand in new york and quebec. new york corn producers are actively participating in plans to set up a fuel ethanol plant in the state. soybean acreage for 2002 in ontario is likely to decline as much as 10 percent, owing to poor yields last year, lack of a solution to the aphid problem, shortage of quality seed, and a low price ratio relative to corn. less wheat was planted than expected, due to limited planting conditions in the fall. since both soybeans and wheat acres are down, the corn crop could be one of the largest ever planted. with a mild winter and sporadic snowfall throughout the region, processes controlling nitrogen loss by leaching and denitrification are varying considerably. use of the soil nitrate test is likely to be worthwhile for the 2002 crop. in addition, 2001 crop performance and resulting nutrient removal varied considerably across fields, particularly in ontario, and this variability offers an opportunity for site-specific management of all applied nutrients. ontario's nutrient management act (bill 81) was not passed before the legislature adjourned last fall, and thus it will not be effective until after april 2002, if at all. nevertheless, agri-business organizations have been actively preparing for the requirement of higher accountability of all nutrient users. an important conference on the impact of agricultural nutrients on rural water quality is being planned for 28-30 april 2002 in waterloo, ontario. in new york, 76 out of 152 large cafo's (confined animal feeding operations) completed their comprehensive nutrient management plan (cnmp; a.k.a. animal waste management plan) by the end of december 2001, and the department of environmental conservation is pleased with the compliance rates. in addition, 487 medium-sized cafo's are developing their cnmp's. there are 13 certified nutrient management planners for the state. the cost of completing these plans ranges from $20 to $200 per cow. northcentral united states midwest united states western united states eastern canada & northeast u.s. western canada great plains southeast united states northcentral united states midwest united states western united states eastern canada & northeast u.s. western canada great plains southeast united states agri-facts the environment fertility quiz links article archive quick tips crop nutrient utilization nutrient deficiency symptoms comments search home