environment canada’s special weather statements and weather warnings national home atlantic home quebec home ontario home prairie, nwt and nunavut home bc and yukon home select a topic --------------------------- climate community programs contact list of experts emergencies enforcement and compliance environmental assessment environmental links funding programs hunting hurricane centre legislation we administer marketplace: our products media spokespersons meet our minister meteorology news releases our programs & priorities pollution information publications smog forecast wildlife environment canada’s special weather statements and weather warnings for the safety of people and property, environment canada issues severe winter weather warnings and special weather statements to the public via the media, weather outlets, the internet and weatheradio canada. a special weather statement means actual or expected weather conditions may cause general inconvenience or concern, but do not pose a serious enough threat to warrant a weather warning. a special weather statement may also be used when conditions show signs of becoming favourable for severe weather when the situation is not definite enough or too far in the future to justify a warning. a weather warning alerts you that severe weather is occurring or that hazardous weather is highly probable. severe thunderstorm or tornado warnings may be issued less than one hour in advance. other weather warnings are generally issued 12 to 24 hours in advance. this fact sheet lists some of the more winter weather warnings and special weather statements issued for the public, by environment canada’s atlantic region weather centres. note that criteria for warnings are established to meet local and regional needs and may vary slightly from region to region across canada. contact your nearest weather outlet to confirm criteria for your area. blizzard warning expect snow or blowing snow to reduce visibility to less than one kilometre, with wind speeds greater than 40 km/h, and temperatures of -3oc or colder to last for four hours or more. a blizzard warning may be issued if the temperature is as warm as -1oc. stock up on heating fuel and food. stay indoors and wait out the storm. blizzard warnings may include the conditions for wind, heavy snowfall, blowing snow and/or wind chill warnings when issued and the details would be described in the warning bulletin. winter storm warning may be issued when two or more winter conditions reach warning proportions (eg. wind and snow, or freezing rain followed by heavy snowfall). be prepared to cancel travel plans and stay indoors. heavy snowfall warning expect a snowfall of 15 cm or more in 24 hours or less (except in newfoundland and labrador, 15 cm in 12 hours or less). travel could become hazardous. blowing snow warning snow or blowing snow reducing visibility to less than 1 km (<5/8 mile) for the duration of 3 hours or more. wind chill warning expect very cold temperatures combining with wind to create outdoor conditions hazardous to human activity. wind chill values of -35, or colder, constitute a warning in the maritimes and newfoundland. wind chill values of -45, or colder, constitute a warning for labrador. be prepared to stay indoors. freezing rain warning freezing rain for 4 hours or more or significant accumulation is expected. expect slippery walking and driving conditions, and possible damage to trees and overhead wires due to rain freezing on contact to form a coating of ice. avoid travel. freezing drizzle warning freezing drizzle for 7 hours or more in the maritimes, (8 hours or more in newfoundland and labrador) or significant accumulation is expected. expect slippery walking and driving conditions, and possible damage to trees and overhead wires due to rain freezing on contact to form a coating of ice. avoid travel. heavy rainfall warning issued when heavy or prolonged rainfall is sufficient to cause local/widespread flooding. expect 50 mm of rain over 24 hours or less. during the winter months when snow and frozen ground may limit proper drainage the rainfall criteria lowers to 25mm over 24 hours or less. a warning may be issued for lesser rainfall amounts if drainage is expected to be particularly limited due to a recent heavy snowfall and frozen ground, resulting in a high potential for flooding. wind warning expect winds blowing steadily at 65 km/h or more, or winds gusting to 90 km/h or more, for at least one hour for the maritime provinces. expect winds blowing steadily at 75 km/h or more, or winds gusting to 100 km/h or more, for at least one hour for newfoundland and labrador. secure or put away loose objects such as outdoor furniture, put your car in the garage, and bring livestock to shelter. les suêtes wind use the same criteria as a wind warning for the maritimes. these winds occur over the a specific area of the cape breton highlands. les suêtes is an acadian phrase used to describe very strong southeast winds that occur in an area along the western coast of cape breton island. local fisherman report that the effects can extend 10 to 15 miles offshore. because of the highly localized nature of these events this separate warning event is used. the warning covers a limited area of "west coast of cape breton from margaree harbour to bay st lawrence". storm surge warning a storm surge warning is issued when a storm surge and/or high waves may result in significant flooding in coastal areas. what's new | about us | your environment | information/publications | weather | home | francais | contact us | help | search | canada site atlantic climate centre | community programs | conserving nature | contact list of experts | emergencies | enforcement and compliance | environmental assessment | environmental links | funding programs | legislation we administer | marketplace: our products | media spokespersons | meet our minister | news releases the green lanetm, environment canada's world wide web site important notices and disclaimers page last updated: 2001-12-03