g8 summit site - about kananaskis - climate climate as canada is a northern country, international visitors are often confused about the weather. alberta is in fact the sunniest province in canada–even on cold winter days, sunshine often sparkles off the snow. so, regardless of the season, bring your sunglasses! alberta is a comparatively dry province. when rain or snow comes, it usually doesn’t last long and travel is rarely interrupted. note: in the mountainous areas, like banff, canmore and kananaskis, the weather patterns can vary a little more dramatically than in the rest of the province, occasionally with fluctuations of 10-20 degrees in one day. average temperatures (in celsius) in calgary and banff, which is located 70 kilometres (44 miles) from kananaskis calgary banff from to from to february -12 -5 -11 1 march -8 3 -8 4 april -2 11 -3 9 may 3 16 2 15 june 7 20 5 18 current weather in calgary we're sorry this is a javascript provided by the weather network. if you wish to see the current weather in calgary please visit: the weather network seasons for international visitors, the following is a general guide to the seasons: spring: march to may summer: may to september autumn: september to november winter: december to march description monthly weather information (for months leading up to the summit): february (winter temperatures): heavy snowfall. winter apparel, such as overcoats, hat, boots, gloves, are needed. this is an excellent month to enjoy winter sporting activities. march (winter temperatures, but moderating): winter apparel is still required (see above). snow begins to disappear; however, winter sports are still possible in resort areas. april (milder temperatures): days are warmer, but evenings are cool. may (medium temperatures): medium-weight apparel. flowers generally begin blooming in mid-month. june (warm): summer clothing is required, with something warmer for the evenings. note: insect repellent is a must for camping or bush travel. links for five-day weather forecasts for calgary and banff (which is located 70 kilometres (44 miles) from kananaskis) you may wish to visit: discover edmonton.com(www.discoveredmonton.com/edmonton/visitorinformation/weatherinformation) weather office(www.weatheroffice.ec.gc.ca/forecast/maps/ab_e.html) canadian climate normals(www.msc-smc.ec.gc.ca/climate/climate_normals/show_normals_e.cfm?station_id=292&prov=ab) the weather network(www.theweathernetwork.com/cities/ab_index.htm) send this page to a friend questions or comments? last updated: 2002-01-11 important notices