fact sheet - winter weather warnings environmentcanadayour windowon the weather fact sheetwinter weather warnings ontario's infamous winter weather is like the ups and downs and twists and turns of a roller coaster ride. since most of the province lies on north america's major storm track, winter weather systems travel through ontario on average every 3 to 5 days. ontario is the battleground between cold arctic air invading from the north and the warm moist air pushing up from the gulf of mexico. in one day, residents, especially those in southern ontario, may be drenched by cold winter rain then covered with snow because north winds dropped temperatures to well below freezing. as the old saying goes... "if you don't like the weather, wait a bit...it will change!" ontario winter weather varies day to day and year to year. on christmas day in 1980, the people of toronto shivered in the nose-freezing cold of -25°c. christmas day, two years later, torontonians walked around in sweaters and rain jackets in spring like 17°c temperatures. ontario covers so much territory that the average daily temperatures may differ by as much as 20 celsius degrees. for example, the average daily temperatures in january range from near minus -24°c in northern portions of the province to a relatively balmy -4°c in southwestern ontario. not surprisingly, most winters begin earlier and end later in the north than in the south. the winter season in northern ontario usually starts in october and ends in mid-may. in southern ontario, the winter season starts in november and finishes around the middle of april. we may joke about winter. but winter weather is no joke. bitter cold and winter storms kill more than 100 people in canada every year. that is more than the number of canadians killed by the combined effects of tornadoes, thunderstorms, lightning, floods, hurricanes and heat waves. winter watches and warnings when severe weather approaches, environment canada warns canadians in order to give them time to protect their families and to make sound economic decisions. the ontario weather service alerts the public by issuing special weather statements, winter storm watches and winter weather warnings. these are broadcast over regional and local radio and television stations as well as environment canada's weatheradio. special weather statements (see summer weather statements) in ontario, environment canada issues special weather statements to flag the approach of significant or severe weather. the special weather statement is your first line of defence against hazardous winter weather. special weather statements are issued for three reasons. to alert you that severe weather is on the horizon but at least 24 hours away. in this case, the special weather statement flags the possibility of winter severe weather. the information provided is an overview with few details about the type or amount of precipitation expected and the areas affected. or to alert you that a weather system of inconvenience is approaching and is 6 to 24 hours away. in this case, environment canada does not expect the criteria for a weather warning to be reached. but you may be inconvenienced by the weather. or to alert you that unusual weather is expected. in this case, the special weather statement is issued because of your anticipated interest or concern for safety. such weather may include the first real snowfall of the season, thick fog over a wide area, or thunderstorms in february. winter storm watch (see summer watches) environment canada issues a winter storm watch as a "heads up" that severe and possibly dangerous weather is expected soon. the approaching weather may affect your safety or at least be inconvenient. the winter storm watch is your second line of defence. two points to remember about winter storm watches: winter storm watches are usually issued 12 to 24 hours in advance of the approaching bad weather. winter storm watches are an alert to the possibility of severe weather. please, watch the skies and listen to the radio or television for new developments. environment canada will either end the winter storm watch or upgrade it to a winter weather warning, depending on the conditions. winter weather warnings (see summer warnings) environment canada issues winter weather warnings only when severe weather is expected to occur. the weather service tries to provide lead times of 3 to 18 hours. environment canada's warnings are quite specific about the type of weather approaching. winter weather warnings are your third and most important line of defense against severe weather. please pay attention to them. there are 10 types of winter weather warnings. winter weather warnings issued heavy snow warning when 15 centimetres (cm) or more of snow is expected to fall within 12 hours. snow squall warning when, to the lee of the great lakes or other large lakes, 15 cm or more of snow is likely to fall within 12 hours; or when under snow squall conditions, the visibility is likely to be near zero for four hours or more, even without warning level accumulations of snow. blizzard warnings when forecasters expect all of the following conditions to occur and last for four or more hours: winds of 50 kilometres an hour (km/h) or more visibility of 1 km or less windchill factor to exceed 1600 wind warning when winds are forecast to reach 60 km/h or more for three or more hours and/or forecasters expect any wind gusts of 90 km/h or more. freezing rain warning whenever moderate to heavy freezing rain is expected; or when light freezing rain or moderate to heavy freezing drizzle is forecast to fall for two or more hours. heavy rain warning when 25 millimetres (mm) of rain is expected to fall within 24 hours and the ground is frozen or sodden with little snow on it; or when more than 50 mm of rain is expected to fall within 12 hours but the ground is dry or covered in snow and is capable of absorbing much of the rain. flash freeze warning when ice is expected to form rapidly on the roads because of the weather conditions. such conditions may include temperatures which are expected to fall quickly from above 0c to well below it or when snow, rain, freezing rain or freezing drizzle is falling as the temperatures start to plummet. windchill warning when the risk of frostbite or hypothermia exists. the criteria for windchill warnings vary in different parts of the province because people become acclimatized to the winter in their area. the three windchill warning levels in ontario are: windchill -35 or lower for south-central and southwestern ontario windchill -45 or lower for the rest of ontario with the exception of the northern parts of northwestern ontario windchill -55 or lower for the northern parts of northwestern ontario with a windchill below -10, one's degree of discomfort starts to increase. with a windchill below -25, the risk of frostbite starts to increase. cold wave warning when temperatures are expected to fall within 24 hours from above normal or seasonal temperatures to very cold temperatures. the two very cold temperature levels for warnings again vary with geographic location: for south central and southwestern portions of ontario: very cold temperature level is reached when minimum temperatures are expected to fall to -20°c or less with maximum temperatures not expected to rise above -10°c. for the rest of ontario: very cold temperature level is reached when minimum temperatures are expected to fall to -30°c or less with maximum temperatures not expected to rise above -20°c. winter storm warning when more than 25 cm of snow is expected to fall within 24 hours or forecasters expect two or more of the weather conditions listed in the warnings above to occur; for instance, if more than 15 cm of snow was expected to be accompanied by winds of more than 60 km/h. other winter weather stuff whiteout is the term used to describe blizzard-like or blowing snow 	conditions which reduce visibility to a few feet. people standing in a whiteout 	are unable to see shadows or landmarks and lose all sense of direction, 	perception and sometimes even balance as the land and the sky seem to blend into 	one. sleet is an un-canadian term that is not part of environment canada's 	vocabulary. americans use this term to the describe a mixture of rain, snow and 	ice pellets usually accompanied by biting winds. the canadians are wordier and 	mention all precipitation types that may occur at the same time. blizzards, if we strictly apply the definition, are a relatively rare event in ontario! the "highs" 	and "lows" of ontario winters highest recorded temperature between december and february: 22.2°c at niagara falls on jan 22, 1950 lowest recorded temperature -58.3°c at iroquois falls on jan 23, 1935. heaviest 24 hour recorded snowfall 101.6 cm at nolalu, near thunder bay on mar 24, 1975 winteriest city reputation timmins, because of average snowfall, number of below-freezing days 	and cold nights...some car manufacturers test their cars and trucks here. sunniest winter (average) thunder bay coldest windchill thunder bay on jan 10 1982. actual temperature -42°c with winds 	at 56 km/h produced a windchill factor of 2750. greatest frequency of freezing rain (average) northern portions of the ottawa valley south and east of north bay 	with 20-25 instances of freezing rain a winter. snowiest location lots of choices and mainly near lake huron and lake superior. most 	likely location is the lake superior snow belt, north of sault ste. marie with an 	average in excess of 400 cm of snowfall per winter. obtaining winter weather information environment canada provides winter weather information to the public via hourly bulletins, automated telephone answering devices (atads) and weatheradio. in addition, specific weather information may be obtained directly through an environment canada meteorologist via the 1-900 user-pay telephone service, weather-one-on-one 1-900-565-5555, for information on climate and weather records call climatesource 1-900-565-1111. for more information visit environment canada's green lane on the internet at http://www.ec.gc.ca/ (winter fact sheet .pdf version) ontario green lane | feedback | français september 24, 2001 url: http://www.on.ec.gc.ca/severe-weather/winter.html copyright © 1999, environment canada. all rights reserved.