severe winter weather quiz - environment canada winter severe weather general precautions wind chill blizzards winter travel winter power failure just for kids winter activities weather words significant weather events severe winter weather quiz cloud chart winter warning advisory criteria severe weather awareness and safety severe winter weather quiz 1. which capital holds western canada's one-day snowfall record? a. winnipeg b. regina c. edmonton d. victoria answer: d. amazingly, 55 cm of snow fell on balmy victoria on february 13th, 1916. the city's only snowplough was kept busy amidst stalled transit vehicles, and the fire department had to resort to horse-drawn wagons to get around! 2. if your sidewalk is 15 metres long and 1.5 metres wide and covered with 40cm of dry, fluffy snow, how many kilograms of snow will you have lifted by the time you clean the walk? a) 100 kg b) 450 kg (or nearly half a tonne) c) 884 kg (or nearly a tonne) d) 1800 kg (or nearly 2 tonnes) answer: c. the snow can equal a staggering 884 kilograms (or nearly one tonne)! pushing aside the heavy load can be a lot less taxing to the heart than lifting and tossing. 3. when the weather forecast reports that “unprotected skin can freeze in under one minute”, the windchill factor is likely: a) under 900 watts/m2 b) 1400 to 1600 watts/m2 c) 1800 to 2000 watts/m2 d) 2000 or more watts/m2 answer: d. 2000 or more watts/m2. brrr at windchill of this level, it may feel like - 40 c. adequate face protection is essential, elementary school children require constant supervision while outdoors. work and travel alone is not advisable. 4. the highest average annual snowfall occurs in a) winnipeg b) ottawa c) quebec city d) st. john's e) yellowknife answer: d. the newfoundland capital gets more snow, freezing rain, strong winds, precipitation and more fog than any other major canadian city - but it also has one of our mildest winters. 5. how fast does a large snowflake fall? a) 2 km/h b) 0.5 km/h c) 5 km/h d) 10 km/h answer: c. watch out for falling snowflakes! they're coming at a speed of 5 km/h. 6. the “great blizzard” struck parts of the prairie provinces with heavy snows, sustained winds of 50 to 90 km/h, and bitterly cold -34 c temperatures. lost livestock numbered over a thousand, and 3 people froze to death. the year was: a) 1902 b) 1957 c) 1964 d) 1992 answer: c. the “great blizzard” ravaged the prairies on december 15th, 1964. 7. you don't have a thermometer, but luckily you have a rhododendron. its leaves have just begun to curl. how cold is it? answer: about 2 c. the amount of curling increases as the temperature drops. at -18c, the curled leaf is about as thick as a pencil. the leaves are horizontal at normal summer temperatures but begin to droop as the temperature approaches freezing. 8. niphablepsia is what form of weather malady? a) snowblindness b) frostbite c) thunderstruck d) weather migraine answer: a. snowblindness. 9. what canadian city endured a record 20 consecutive days when the minimum temperature was less than or equal to -37 c ? a) thompson, manitoba b) inuvik, nwt c) lethbridge, alberta d) yellowknife, nwt answer: d. yellowknife, nwt. the cold spell began december 31st, 1994 and didn't end until january 19th, 1995. 10. is it ever too cold to snow? answer: no. the amount of moisture the air can hold decreases with temperature, and thus snow amounts tend to be smaller in colder temperatures, but no matter how cold the temperature, air can always hold enough moisture to produce snow (when further cooling brings it below its saturation point). 11. which weather phenomenon claims the most canadian lives? a) storms b) floods c) exposure to cold d) lightning e) tornadoes answer: c. 108 canadians die each year from exposure to cold, while other natural events including storms, floods and earthquakes claim 17 lives annually. home | air/weather | wildlife | pollution | info/news | water | community français | contact us | help | search | canada site | national green lane the green lanetm, environment canada's world wide web site url of this page: http://www.pnr-rpn.ec.gc.ca/air/wintersevere/quiz.en.html important notices and disclaimers