lifestyle - new brunswick, canada home - workforce - business costs - location - r&d - infrastructure - sectors - business climate - lifestyle - investnb team - community profiles you are here: home > lifestyle > climate/weather site mapcontact us climate/weather | new brunswick no part of new brunswick lies more than 200 km from the ocean, yet the province has a typically continental flavour to its climate. in summer, the predominant air mass is warm continental, with occasional incursions of hot, humid air from the gulf of mexico. on the other hand, influxes of moist atlantic air produce mild spells in winter and periods of cool weather in summer. average max. temperaturesfredericton, new brunswick . jan feb mar apr may jun jul aug sep oct nov dec c -4.0 -2.5 2.9 9.4 17.2 22.8 25.6 24.5 19.3 13.1 5.7 -1.5 f 24.8 27.5 37.2 48.9 62.9 73 78 76.1 66.7 55.6 42.3 29.3 1998, environnement canada check today's temperatures in new brunswick. northwestern and central new brunswick are the parts of the province that are least affected by the ocean. the north and east shores are modified by the gulf of st. lawrence, but less so than their proximity might suggest. the extent of the sea-effect depends to a large degree on the wind direction, with onshore winds causing the most moderation. generally across the province, as the winter snowfall increases from place to place, the total precipitation for the year decreases. cold winter temperatures and stormy northeasterlies combine to make new brunswick the snowiest of the three mar time provinces. northwestern new brunswick generally receives between 300 and 400 cm of snow annually, for about 33% of its annual total precipitation (rain and snow combined). on the other hand, the eastern and southern sections of the province receive 200 to 300 cm of snow, less than 20% of their annual total precipitation. winter storms frequently bring rain to the fundy coast and snow to the interior. at saint john the season's average snowfall of 293 cm occurs on 59 days between the middle of november and the middle of april. although snowfalls are often deep, the snowcover comes and goes quickly. this pattern may repeat itself three or more times during the winter. in the northwest, however, the snowcover season lasts 160 days and is both reliable and persistent. spring and early summer are notably dry over new brunswick, but there is ample water during the growing season. the interior highlands record about 1200 mm of rainfall a year, with the heaviest amounts falling during the summer months, a pattern characteristic of a continental-type climate. on the other hand, the southern shoreline receives a like amount, but with a slight maximum in fall and early winter. elsewhere, 1000 mm is a representative yearly amount. information provided by environnement canada lifestyle sections lifestyle cost of living education climate/weather healthcare attractions pictures of nb let us know questions? comments?considering moving your business to nb? home - workforce - business costs - location - r&d - infrastructure - sectors - business climate - lifestyle - investnb team - community profiles version française back to top province of new brunswick 2001