accuweather.com winter storm center storms hurricane center lightning maps severe weather winter center premium features register our community tell a friend! chat with us message boards datashare free email our services content for your site products & services weather by e-mail school delays & closings weather database weather to your pager forensic meteorology insurance center marketplace accustore® accuweather info how to reach us: email contact us site info: my account info terms & conditions help site guide affiliate opportunities: advertise with us licensing content let's link my affiliate program accuweather.com > home > storms winter storm center today's winter weather outlook storm heads to the plains by accuweather.com meteorologist matthew rinde a major storm will be moving out of the rockies and into the plains over the next 24 hours. this storm has the potential to bring over 6 inches to a few locations from southern nebraska into iowa. this storm will start by bringing 1-3 inches from the northern rockies eastward to the northern plains. this snow will continue to develop farther south over colorado later thursday night with snowfall amounts up to a foot in the central rocky mountains. this snow should taper to flurries midday friday. this part of the storm will then move out into the plains and quickly spread through kansas into iowa and missouri. this part of the storm could continue east friday night tapering in intensity as it moves away from the main trough axis, then another area of snow could develop as the main storm moves out of the mountains. skiing? check our state ski reports: choose a state, then click below. please select: arizona california colorado connecticut georgia iowa idaho illinois kentucky massachusetts maine michigan minnesota montana north carolina new hampshire new jersey new mexico new york ohio oregon pennsylvania tennessee utah virginia vermont washington west virginia wyoming selected winter maps current snow cover snow/ice/rain radar additional winter maps winter outlook winter outlook (technical discussion) winter advisories winter tips ski reports snow/ice/rain radar winter feature snow cover ©2000 accuweather, inc. all rights reserved. | email us! this service provided to you according to our terms & conditions. privacy statement.