homepage of mitchell brown: canadian weather almanac tell me when this page is updated canadian weather almanac main page the standard joke is that canada has ten months of winter and two months of bad hockey weather. while it certainly seems true that, in the words of one english traveler, canada's winter is "somewhat long" in most parts, the truth is that canada's great size allows it to experience a wide range of climates, from the warm and wet pacific coast to the cooler atlantic coast to the frigid northern arctic islands. in this section, i've brought together a few facts and figures about canada's weather, how it's made, and how it affects our lives. please feel free to send your comments and suggestions about how i can make this collection more informative. i can't promise i'll act on them right away, but i can try. please note: i put these pages online to provide a bit of trivia and information about weather in canada. i am not a professional meteorologist, and i cannot answer questions about what the weather will be like in the near future. but if i can't answer your weather-related questions, i'd be happy to suggest other people and organizations that might be able to help. see my related web sites page for more. weather in depth exploring the hows and whys of weather and weather reporting, along with the wit and wisdom of weathered canadians. · weather glossary words weather people use. · weather and climate they're not the same thing. · clouds how they're made and what they do. · the uv index how we measure uv rays. · the wind chill factor why winds make winter so cold. · the beaufort wind scale how we measure the wind's speed. · weather quotations what's been said about our weather. · weathery places in canada is it cold in cold lake? · since you asked... your questions about the weather. · related web sites & awards other sites with weather information. when disasters strike! when weather turns nasty, you need to know what to do. some basic facts and tips on how to be prepared for the worst. · winter storms · floods · heat waves · hurricanes · thunderstorms · tornadoes · disaster emergency kit weather tables & trivia canadian weather records and statistics, as reported by environment canada. · weather superlatives the hottest, coldest, wettest and driest cities in canada. · weather records how canada's weather records compare to the world's. · average mid-afternoon temperatures in selected canadian cities · average morning temperatures in selected canadian cities · monthly precipitation in selected canadian cities the following charts are all broken down by province. · coldest temperature ever recorded · warmest temperature ever recorded · coldest annual temperature on average · warmest annual temperature on average · greatest average annual bright sunshine · least average annual bright sunshine · greatest average annual snowfall · least average annual snowfall · greatest snow on the ground · greatest average annual precipitation · least average annual precipitation · greatest average wind speed · the most hail · the most fog · the most smoke or haze · the most frost · the most thunderstorms · the most blowing snow